Jennifer Wainaina, a laboratory service manager at MEA factory soil testing lab in Nakuru Town on June 22, 2021. PHOTO | FRANCIS MUREITHI | NMG For Peterson Kamau, one of the biggest frustrations he has been enduring for the last five years is poor potato yields on his five-acre farm in Mau Narok, Nakuru. Like many other farmers in the region, Mr Kamau is not aware that the soil on his farm is increasingly becoming acidic, eating into production despite use of fertiliser. He is not alone. In the neighbouring Molo sub-county, Charles Koech’s biggest headache is how to replenish his soil to boost yield. "I grow potatoes in my three acres but the yields have remained constantly low despite using fertiliser. I have never understood why the yield has been dwindling and the cost of growing the potato is increasing," says Mr Koech. David Irungu has been planting maize on his three-acre farm at Karandi, in Laikipia County but the yield per acre has stagnated to 10 bags. "I apply fertiliser as instructed by agriculture officer but I have never harvested more than 10 bags," adds Mr Irungu. The farmers are now banking on a new factory that produces fertiliser tailor-made for various regions. Fertiplant East Africa Limited has opened an ultra-modern fertiliser manufacturing plant and laboratory for testing soils in Nakuru's Industrial Area. "Supplying plants with the right amount of nutrients at the right time is the key to a successful production enterprise,” says Jennifer Wainaina, the Laboratory Service Manager at MEA factory. “To achieve this objective the first step is to monitor soil nutrient levels through yearly soil tests." By doing this, Ms Wainaina says, “Farmers can no longer assume a one-size-fits-all or cheapest price when choosing fertiliser.” Moving forward, she notes, farmers should apply tailor-made or recommended fertiliser that has been informed by soil testing and that “addresses uniqueness of their soils given that the one-size-fits-all approach has greatly contributed to acidifying and deterioration of soils and with it decline in farmer yields”. With soil testing and the right fertiliser, farmers can witness an increase in yields by between 50 and 150 percent. "Collecting and conducting soil tests each year serves as a report card for the soil. Soil test reports help in determining soil organic matter, pH, electrical conductivity and levels of important macro (phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium) and micronutrients (boron, zinc, among others). These reports also help to estimate lime or sulfur application rates to increase or reduce soil pH, respectively," Ms Wainaina tells Enterprise. "Managing optimum soil nutrient levels is the key to maintaining a sustainable anda productive enterprise. Before a fertilisation programme can be planned, it is important to know the cropping and soil fertilisation history of the field." Ms Wainaina notes that MEA factory is manufacturing a special NPK fertilisers for potato growing areas where most soils are slightly or moderately acidic. “The fertiliser has lime to condition the acidity as well as micro nutrients and is specifically manufactured for potato crop. If well applied it increases yield by more than 35 percent,” says Ms Wainaina. Peris Kiarie says the fertiliser from the Nakuru factory has helped her enhance her green vegetable production in the Mau Narok area. "My production has doubled from 100 heads of cabbages to 200 heads in half an acre piece of land," says Mr Kiarie. Ms Wainaina says most of the lab analysis they have done revealed a big chunk of Kenyan soils is acidic and degraded and some have a pH of 4 while some soils in Naivasha are alkaline. "With these kinds of soil deficiency we advise our farmers on how to do correction by the use of lime," explains Ms Wainaina. The lab also analyses the fertilisers formulated at the factory for quality check and ensure the input is specifically manufactured for specific areas before they are released to the market. "The purpose of quality check is to understand the elements within the fertilisers to ensure they are adequate to address the farmers concerns and help them reap maximum returns from their enterprises," she says, adding that farmers need to be equipped with the right skills regarding healthy soils. "Farmers need to maintain soil health because healthy soil helps to maintain its capacity to sustain the living system and protect the climate. Our goal is to help farmers apply the right fertilisers for specific regions to correct the soil deficiency and enhance productivity." She adds: “Farmers should avoid the guesswork of applying fertilisers they are not aware of. Let them understand the type of soil they are planting their crops." Ms Wainaina notes that There is no soil that cannot be cured with the modern analysis techniques and “ultra-modern machines we have which are capable of giving the correct fertiliser for specific plants and regions." A comprehensive soil package testing costs the farmers Sh3,500 and comes with fertiliser recommendation while the other package dubbed basic package where farmers pay Sh2,500.