Managers risk losing the desired impact when they think they have to be involved in every aspect of the business. PHOTO | SHUTTERSTOCK “Focus and simplicity... once you get there, you can move mountains” Steve Jobs Out of all things that need addressing, what are the three areas that if focused on will make the biggest positive difference in your workplace? It may sound crazy, but there are three leverage points that if addressed will best propel you and your organisation to meet its goals and much greater impact. They are likely not the objectives, goals and targets in your planning documents. It’s the things that if focused on in the next, say 60 days, with a sense of urgency and possibility, will have a leverage point difference. “Give me a lever long enough and a fulcrum on which to place it, and I shall move the world,” said Archimedes, 2,000 years ago. Metaphors aside, in practice: What is that lever, what is that fulcrum in your organisation? During the disruptive waves of coronavirus, business is filled with uncertainty. To get through what can be confusing workdays, focus is your most important asset. Managers risk losing the desired impact when they think they have to be involved in every aspect of the business. Risk is spending valuable time and brainpower on low-priority and energy-draining decisions. In continuing to do this, the danger is that, with time, managers get overworked. Instead of trying to do everything, focus on the right things. In 2020, Trey Taylor wrote a book, A CEO Only Does Three Things, which focuses on his suggested three pillars of business: culture, people, and numbers. It would be great if there was just one single secret ingredient that will fix everything. In the hard light of the day, you realise there is no one factor that will deliver success. Just as there is no single ingredient that makes a meal tasty. There is no one part of your car’s engine that’s more important than the others. Like any well-oiled machine, your business needs multiple elements fitting together and complementing to see the results you want. Businesses have the advantage of knowing where they stand in terms of profit and loss. In the NGO and donor community, working in the realm of social good, it is much more difficult to know the impact. By the time a mid or final programme evaluation reveals that the precious funding has not had the desired impact, it is often too late to be proactive and take required actions. For NGOs running a large programme with multiple initiatives and donors, it can be confusing to know what to focus on. In the worst case scenario, the risk is that in trying to be everything to everyone, one becomes nothing to a few, diluting value proposition. If you see the words ‘efficiency’ and ‘effectiveness’ together in the same sentence, a warning bell should go off in your grey matter. Efficiency and effectiveness are different things. Efficiency is a measure of output over input, indicating how productively the resources were used. Simply, efficiency is doing things right, while effectiveness is doing the right things. Risk is that one can be extremely efficient at doing a task that just isn’t all that significant. Idea of focus goes back millennia, perhaps even all the way to the Garden of Eden. In more recent times, the concept of focus, in the form of critical success factors (also known as key results areas) was first developed by D. Ronald Daniel, in his 1961 Harvard Business Review article Management Information Crisis. John Rockart of MIT's Sloan School of Management popularised the idea almost 20 years later. He defined a critical success factor as "The limited number of areas in which results, if they are satisfactory, will ensure successful competitive performance for the organisation. They are the few key areas where things must go right for the business to flourish.” Problem is that, in the 40 years since those words were written, we have had an ICT information explosion, where there has been the creation of an almost astronomical number of indicators managers use to assess performance. Yet, in this confusing universe of possibilities, how is it possible to focus? What should those three focus areas be? How do you get to the point where you are clear on what they should be? What shouldn’t they be? These are things that if focused on, the greatest movement is created. They are not necessarily the points that are already laid out in the mass of planning documents. Maybe what needs to be focused on is not obvious. For instance, in a sometimes laid back NGO that aims to influence public policy, it may be getting staff to respond to all communication by the close of the business day, sending a real-time signal of being sharp and responsive. So, how do you decide what those three critical areas are? There are a number of routes you can take. Genuine organisational change always begins with a sense of urgency. Imagine that in the next 30 to 60 days you wanted to create a shift, a sense of momentum, a significant impact, here are some possible approaches: Question the default position: Don’t take the way things have always been for granted. After all, someone created the systems, approaches; they are not engraved in stone. Avoid the confirmation bias: The tendency to interpret new information in a way that is compatible, in alignment with beliefs. One way to do this is to ask staff to write in confidence what they think the three priority areas should be. Then post them by themes for discussion. Look out for ideas that look wacky that may contain real gems. Get out of noise/ normal workspace: Go for a long walk, or meditate. Just sit outside, breathe in and out and try and quiet your mind, which you will see is quite difficult to do. There will always be that constant chattering in your head, but with time it will dissipate. "Don’t let the noise of others drown out your own inner voice” was how the co-founder of Apple said it. Trust your gut, trust your intuition. Act: Once you have the three areas, take the first steps. Nothing happens until something moves. This may mean taking a small [low risk] gamble, doing something outside your perceived limitation. Don’t be afraid of losing, be afraid of not trying, not taking the initial moves forward. “Go as far as you can see. When you get there, you'll be able to see further,” was how Thomas Carlyle expressed it.