Safaricom CEO Peter Ndegwa. PHOTO | POOL On May 21, the Ethiopian Communications Authority announced that the Global Partnership for Ethiopia, a consortium led by Safaricom Plc  , had been awarded a licence to operate in Ethiopia’s telecommunications sector in view of the efforts to liberalise the economy. Safaricom has indicated that the consortium, in which it commands a 55.7 per cent stake, intends to start operations in 2022 through the rollout of a voice and data network. Julians Amboko talked with Safaricom CEO Peter Ndegwa on a raft of issues, including the political and foreign exchange risks in Ethiopia as well as the valuation of the company. ********** Of course, there are risks that we need to consider as part of the overall investment but we need to look at Ethiopia as a long-term investment. In Ethiopia, we see a huge population, extremely favourable demographics and a country that is keen on advancing. This is the only country that has one telecoms operator and there isn’t another country which offers the potential and opportunity that Ethiopia offers. Political risk is present like it is in every other country but the business case is actually positive. One of the reasons we have structured the investment vehicle the way we have through the Netherlands is that the Netherlands has a Bilateral Investment Treaty with Ethiopia. One of the things such a treaty helps you with is managing some of the broader risks that you may face as an investor. Of course, we plan to take appropriate insurances. We have not made that decision because we were still awaiting the licence confirmation but you would expect us to take appropriate risk insurance to secure the business. It is true that there are liquidity challenges and currency fluctuation in Ethiopia. The government has been clear that it is undertaking a process of economic liberalisation, which includes the foreign exchange market. By 2023, the government believes foreign exchange will be largely liberalised. Because this is an investment which demands significant capital expenditure at the start, you don’t expect that dividends will be coming through in the early stages. We are quite comfortable that by the time we need to start transacting on dividend payouts to shareholders we expect the liberalisation will be in play. In thinking through the Ethiopia business case, we benchmarked against the region. Each country is at a different stage of development and level of penetration and competitiveness. The penetration of mobile communication is just over 40.0 per cent. You would expect that once the market has two or three players, this could rise to 90.0 per cent plus in a few years. Remember, we also have population coverage targets from the market regulator as part of the licence requirement. So, what we can say is that we intend to accelerate the roll-out of our network across both voice and data to realise the share of the population which our assumptions suggest we can get to. Unfortunately, we cannot disclose that at this point. Average Revenue Per User (ARPU) will be determined by the competitive intensity, how fast we get to mobile money and other issues. We are currently at about 20 or so sites and are targeting having between 150 and 200 sites by the end of the financial year by which time we will have been able to test a number of use cases. One of the challenges around the rollout of 5G is handsets. Remember that, for example, penetration of 4G enabled handsets in Kenya is only 40.0 per cent and that is what we have been trying to accelerate through Lipa Mdogo Mdogo through which we are adding a few million 4G enabled handsets annually. For us to accelerate 5G, we first need handset penetration to get to the right level. In another three or four years, the penetration should be at about 70.0 per cent. While I can’t pronounce myself on where Safaricom is valued, what I can do is to make available as much information about the company as possible to allow investors to value the business. There are three aspects on how someone evaluates the prospects of a business. First is the growth opportunities looking into the future. The second aspect is returns and this is where something like the dividends we pay comes in. Safaricom is actually a fairly diversified business compared to a typical telco. Our intention is to continue providing acceptable returns to shareholders. The third important aspect then is how we manage risk, whether they are cyber risks, regulatory risks and so on.