When is a strategy not a strategy? Looking at a PowerPoint recently, prepared by a company paid to design a digital strategy, the one thing I could see no sign of was any ‘strategy’. It listed some audiences and a posting schedule, as in how many posts a day on Facebook, how many on Twitter. It stated that posts can be videos, infographics, or in other formats, and said, too, that social media offered opportunities to engage and create buzz. But, from top to bottom, it was a set of general, unrelated points about social media that closed with the suggestion that the organisation should post some vibrant content. Yet, there is nothing unusual about that empty document. All too often companies, organisations, and even individuals reach for experts to deliver a communications strategy, and what comes back are a few points about which social media platforms exist and a potential posting framework (we shall post two LinkedIn posts a week, one a video and one a text post). There is no rationale for the platforms chosen, no data given as to who they reach, no mapping of platforms against target audiences — which social media reached decision makers, which one reaches urban high-income consumers, or rural low-income consumers? And what is vibrant? I’m vibrant. Maybe you can post me. Indeed, when communication can be that non-specific, little wonder we can end up with ghost workers in a communications operation and apparently no-one notices, until possibly years later. But, actually, there are real tasks and skills for communication staff and agencies, with some very clear markers of calibre. Firstly, a strong communications team should be asking you for the aims of your communication — as in, what you want to achieve. You may be a little vague on that, so if you’re reaching for raising your organisation’s profile, please check a layer deeper for what difference it will make if your organisation’s profile actually is higher. There, in those differences, do you see any aims? For instance, we may be told by clients, ‘we want to increase enrolments in our primary school’ or ‘we want people to reach for our products first on the food shelves’. Sometimes, there’s a quality message: ‘we want people to understand how safe our products are’, or a behaviour change, ‘we want girls to stop missing school because their education isn’t considered valuable by their families’. As it is, messages such as these are essential to any communications strategy. For only if you start from what you want people to understand or know, or even think and do, can communication efforts be directed at achieving those aims. Otherwise, it’s just pointless ‘noise’ and, most often, vanity publishing, saying how great I am, when, truly, no-one much cares. However, with your aims defined, the communication skills can kick in, beginning with relevance, for, the way humans are built, if we recognise something coming up that addresses a problem we are experiencing — like what to do if our school fees aren’t running at three-quarter a term on the new four terms — we will click immediately. The more that posts speak to our own lives and experiences, the more we will open them, like them and follow them, along with their ‘messaging’ too. We also click to laugh, but that works best on recognition from our own lives too, and usually around power dynamics, between men and women, the prestigious and the ordinary. Then we click most readily of all as change hits: will this new change affect us, and how? In sum, when you are working with communicators who know what a communications strategy is, content messages, themes and concepts will be king. They will start by delving into what you really want to achieve through communication, and convert that into a set of messages, to be delivered over the right channels. And then their real brilliance will be in research and finding facts and information that show those messages, that are interesting and relevant.