Jedidah Mutindi (right) with a customer outside her Flyover Tiles & Ceramics hardware shop at Emali Township in Makueni County. NMG PHOTO Wearing golden highlighted baby locks on a bob haircut, Jedidah Mutindi is easy to dismiss as a worker as she moves an item here and talks to a customer there at Flyover Tiles & Ceramics, a busy hardware shop she owns at Emali Township which strides Kajiado and Makueni counties. The 34-year-old busy bee is among six siblings who separately run successful hardware outlets in the area after being inspired by their father, Mzee Daniel Mutua, who also runs a hardware shop. Save for Ms Mutindi’s shop, four of the siblings run hardware shops at Mtito Andei Township where Mr Mutua has been running his Muundani Hardware Stores for decades. The sixth shop is operated by Paul Maundu at Nzoila Trading Cente at the fridges of Mtito Andei Township. Surprisingly, the siblings are collaborators rather than business rivals. Their shops deal in cement, paint, timber, corrugated iron sheets, steel, water tanks, pipes, toiletry, and floor tiles. But each has specialised in components needed at different stages of construction. “We mainly deal in the commodities which go into finishing houses and other structures such as floor tiles, paint, and toiletry. The other shops deal in the material for the structural components of buildings while another one has specialised in selling wiring and electrical appliances,” said Ms Mutindi. The hardware shops mainly depend on walk-in-walk-out customers. They also depend on contractors working under churches, county governments, the National Government Constituency Development Fund and non-governmental organisations. “When a customer orders for a commodity which we do not stock we easily get it for them from one of us,” said Mr Joseph Munyao. Purely coincidental But how did the members of the same family end up venturing in the same kind of business? “Venturing in the hardware business was purely coincidental; we did not sit to plan it that way," said Ms Mutindi, a sociology graduate from Moi University. She worked as a programme officer at African Sand Dam Foundation, a local non-governmental organisation which promotes climate smart agriculture, sand conservation and construction of sand dams to restore rivers in arid regions, before jumping into the deep end of entrepreneurship four years ago. The nascent hardware business Ms Mutindi had set up as a side hustle had started thriving by the time she quit formal employment. The shop was now carrying its own weight and, like an infant, she knew it required her undivided attention to thrive. She uses Facebook to market her merchandise and over the years she has established a hardware empire which overshadows what her father established. But like her siblings, she credits her father who mentored them. “We grew up admiring our father’s enterprise. It is like we silently wished to fit into his shoes if that is what it takes to lead an admirable lifestyle,” Ms Janet Mwende tells the Enterprise. Just like her brother Joseph, the last born in the family amassed capital after years of driving trucks during the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) line which cuts across Mtito Andei Township. Trucking, to them, was like child play since they had grown up doing the same thing at the family business where they delivered goods to customers on their father’s truck during school holidays. As soon as the railway project was completed, they terminated their contracts with China Roads and Bridges Construction Company, the Chinese company which was constructing the new railway and separately set up hardware shops on pieces of land they had acquired. At Mtito Andei Township, Mr Munyao’s Design-US hardware shop overlooks his father’s. Although he studied website design at Jomo Kenyatta University of Science and Agriculture, the 33-year-old had always been itching to start a hardware business. He notes that starting a hardware shop of modest standards requires a significant amount of capital “since an entrepreneur has to earn the trust of suppliers before they start supplying him/her with commodities on credit”. Unpredictable changes The other significant challenge the family members have encountered separately in running their hardware shops is unpredictable changes in the tastes of their clients. Their working closely has helped mitigate the problem as what one does not stock can be sought from the others. “In addition to selling building materials we often find ourselves offering free consultancy to our clients who seek advice on a thing or two related to building and construction,” says Janet Mwende, the last born, recalling how her experience working at the family shop fertilised the business acumen. “Many of our suppliers, and the goodwill we enjoy, are borrowed from the family shop”. The old man was 26 years old when he started his hardware business. He had earlier operated a butchery shop which he closed down after burning fingers. “The lesson I learned over the years is that an enterprise that fails to carry its weight should be dropped for another one,” the 71-year-old shares. Whereas he has diversified in real estate and agribusiness, five of his children depend fully on their hardware businesses where they work alongside a combined workforce of more than 40 workers. It is only Peter Mutua, an engineer based in Nairobi, who runs his as a side hustle. “There is a lot of freedom in running a business. Beyond the freedom that comes with being your own boss, the returns are irresistible. Importantly, it is also more fulfilling in business than in formal employment. As a family we feel that we have played a big role in enabling many schools to be conducive for learning and the neighborhood to have decent houses,” says Patrick Mwalyo. The proprietor of Pamwamu Hardware, one of the most vibrant hardware shops in Mtito Andei Township, went full time in business after resigning from Technoserve, a non-governmental organisation which, among other things, promotes entrepreneurship among the youth, where he had steadily risen through the ranks to become a powerful manager in charge of the coast region.