Shipment being offloaded at the Lamu Port. FILE PHOTO | NMG Zanzibar and Far East have proved to be Lamu port’s major market as the third Maersk vessel and the fifth vessel since the port was opened three months ago scheduled to dock this weekend. The third Maersk vessel Mv Seago Piraeus, is planned to arrive in Lamu on August 21 to discharge 100 twenty-foot equivalent unit (TEUs) from Salalah port which will then connect onto the vessel destined for Zanzibar. Early July, the first vessel by CMA CGM to make maiden call docked in Lamu from Soviet Union where it is expected to collect about 50 TEUs from Zanzibar to Far West. Maersk Eastern Africa managing director Carl Lorenz said good business, partnership and collaboration with the Kenya Port Authorities (KPA), Kenyan government and all stakeholders has encouraged his company to invest more in the region. Mr Lorenz has also encouraged more companies to join hands and develop shipping and logistics sector effectively to contribute to the growth of the economy. “The arrival of the third Maersk vessel marks another milestone in the long history we have in serving Kenya, through both Mombasa and Lamu by ensuring that importers and exporters in Eastern Africa are able to connect their cargo to all global markets. We shall remain close and focused in offering services to our customers and we shall continue to offer solutions to them,” said Mr Lorenz. Maersk and CMA CMG have docked two ship each since the Lamu port started its operationalisation on June 15 this year. The four vessels are Mv Spirit, Amu1, MV CAP Carmel and MV Seago Bremerhaven. KPA said it is ready to handle any vessel at the Lamu port after it installed relevant cargo handling machines including panamax and post-panamax vessels with a capacity of over 10,000 TEUs. Some of the operations equipment installed at berth number one of the three completed berth at the port include two Harbour Mobile Cranes, ICT infrastructure and we also have deployed multi-skilled staff to ensure smooth operations. KPA has also committed to acquire Ship to Shore Gantry cranes in order to fully kit the three berths as it call ed upon other shipping lines to introduce services to the Port of Lamu. The facility, which has since been operating on transshipment, is yet to start receiving transit cargo due to incomplete road infrastructure connecting to major towns despite Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) geo-fencing and gazette Mombasa-Malindi- Minjila-Lamu and Lamu-Minjila- Garissa road. Lamu port is facing stiff competition in East and Horn of Africa with Somaliland and Tanzania revamping their facilities