Ms Betty Mbondo at a farm in Makueni County. PHOTO | POOL In 2019, Betty Mbondo was a disappointed farmer after harvesting a good pigeon peas crop only to missing out on market. Like most otherunregulated crops in Kenya, the market price was determined by middlemen and Ms Mbondo says their low offer was inadequate to sustain her enterprise. In the following year she cut the cover under the crop to a paltry one acre from 15 acres and was contemplating to abandone the crop altogether. However, the farmer has gone back to large scale production with 10 acres this season, thanks to a contractual scheme initiated by Egerton University. Ms Mbondo is a member of the Makueni Agribusiness Venture, a group of farmers contracted by the university to undertake seed production. Since joining the scheme, farmers have seen their earnings per kilogramme jump four times to Sh100. The university has been providing improved seeds and training on good agronomical practices, which ensures that yields are higher when compared with the traditional variety the farmers were planting before. The growers undergo intensive training on seed production from the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT). Under the seed multiplication programme, ICRISAT distribute seeds to the farm ers while Egerton University purchases it from the growers. “With the new arrangement that we now have with the Egerton University, I am going back to large scale farming because of the ready market and good prices,” said Ms Mbondo. The Makueni Agribusiness Venture farmers are now in their second season and news of their sweet earnings has spread fast attracting more farmers to the venture. The new varieties produce between 12 bags and 17 bags and can be harvested three times annually. This means that in one harvest farmers can earn up to Sh1533,000 from 90 kg bags. This compares to three bags in the same period with only one harvest when the traditional seed variety is planted earning the farmers at most Sh6,750. The university has so far released three varieties –Egerton Mbaazi one, two and three– after a seven-year research. John Musyoki, a farmer in Makueni said the new varieties is easy to manage in terms of pests and diseases hence reducing cost of production to farmers. Peter Wambua, chairman of Makueni Agribusiness Ventures, pointed out that the seeds mature early and the fact that they can be harvested more than two times, assures farmers of good returns. “Since last year when ICRISAT researchers introduced us to this new variety and good production practices, we have benefitted a lot from good returns,” he said. High Demand Bernard Towett, a seed specialist with Egerton University, said they institution has embarked on seed multiplication to enhance availability in the wake of high demand. He said even though pigeon peas is among the high value crops, it has been neglected over the years, mainly due to low production achieved from the old variety. “The new variety is early maturing, high yielding and not susceptible to pests, giving farmers an opportunity to earn more,” said Mr Towett. The researcher said the demand of these peas has shot up significantly with counties across Kenya now seeking the seed for planting. “For instance, Taita Taveta now wants seed that they can grow in 600 acres and at the moment we do not have enough supplies,” he said. He said India is also eying the Kenyan pigeon pea as both the grain and legume, but Kenya cannot export their because of the prevailing local demand amid deficit.