MPs during a session at Parliament chambers. PHOTO | FILE Community development and social welfare will be enhanced if the Community Groups Bill is passed into law. The Bill will allow for the simpler registration of community groups based on geographical regions or shared interests. Currently, it is still possible to register the groups but under different laws, which are very complex and involve a long process. This Bill will allow for the registration of social groupings. Some of the community groups that may qualify for registration under this law include resident associations, tribal groupings, family groups and shared interest groups such as book clubs and hiking enthusiasts, among others. Previously for such groups to be registered, they would either be societies or public benefit organisations. The registration is a long process that involves background checks by investigators and other regulators. As a result, many social interest groups remain largely unregistered. Many groups on social media would qualify for this registration as they meet the criteria of special interest groups. I have read through the Bill. It is very sound and contains numerous provisions. The only downside of passing the Bill is the duplication of existing laws. The current trend is to harmonise different laws into one. There are areas of duplication between this Bill and the Public Benefits Organisation Act, for example. Other than that, the Bill is timely. The registration and regulatory framework proposed in the Bill is adequate. The Department of Social Services, which will serve as the regulator, will do the registration. The Bill contains very detailed corporate governance provisions to ensure sound management of community groups. Currently, unregistered community groups pose a threat to the public as it is difficult to get recourse in the event of mismanagement. With the passing of the Bill, such groupings will be registered. Therefore, any complaints can be made to the regulatory authority. The proposed law also has provisions on financial management. This means that in the event of mismanagement then there will be greater financial accountability and transparency. The Bill proposes a sub-county community development committee to handle any social welfare issues in the sub-county. This is good given the many social needs in the counties. The composition of the sub-county committees is such that it is a collaboration between the public and private sectors as represented by the community groups. The regulator will routinely carry out training and capacity building of community groups, which is welcome. There are several benefits of passing this Bill into law. First, the Bill enhances community objectives such as development, participation, engagement and activism, among others. The local groups will enable community development at the grassroots level. Streamlining the grassroots groups under umbrella bodies means it will be easier for community participation to take place. The Constitution allows for public participation whenever new laws are being passed. Passing the Bill would enable registered community groups to give feedback on the new laws and infrastructure projects in an organised manner. The community groups would be stakeholders in infrastructure projects and others. Community activism would be increased with the registration of community groups. These groups will have legal capacity. They would, therefore, be able to, for example, sustain litigation on public interest matters. The groups will also be able to enforce their constitutional rights such as intellectual property, cultural rights, environmental rights and other shared community rights. An example is that the groups can bring action against cultural pilferage and traditional know-how. I hope the Bill is passed into law.