MPs during a session at Parliament chambers. PHOTO | FILE The State will hire tribunal members on permanent and pensionable terms as opposed to part-time service if MPs approve recommendations of a committee. The National Assembly’s Finance and Planning committee says the chairperson and members of the tribunals should be appointed competitively and on a full-time basis by the Judicial Service Commission (JSC). Currently, tribunal members are hired on a part-time basis by the Executive and not the Judicial Service Commission. “The enactment of the Bill will increase the efficiency of the tribunals because the chairperson and members will be competitively recruited on a full-time basis by the JSC as opposed to the past tribunals which were not recruited competitively and operated on a part-time basis,” Gladys Wanga, who chairs the committee, said. In a report on the Tax Appeals Tribunal (Amendment Bill 2021), Ms Wanga said the competitive recruitment and the placing of the tribunals under the judiciary will help clear the case backlog. “With the proposed membership of between 15 and 20, the tribunals will help clear the current backlog of 500 unheard appeals,” Ms Wanga said. She said the 15 to 20 membership will allow the tribunals to constitute as many panels to dispense off the appeals. “This will, in turn, assist in unlocking revenue that is stuck at the tribunals level and hence free the resources necessary for provisions of services by the government,” the report states. The Bill, which contains 18 clauses, seeks to address challenges affecting the Tax Appeals Tribunal Act, 2013, to facilitate the expedition of tax disputes in the country. The Tax Appeals Tribunal is among 34 tribunals that were to be regularised in the High Court judgment delivered on 11 March 2019, challenging the constitution, composition, and operations of local tribunals in Kenya. The petitioner argued that the tribunals established pursuant to Article 169 of the Constitution of Kenya are not part of the Executive, nor are they independent adjudicatory bodies but are subordinate courts that are an integral part of the judiciary. The High Court ruled that the local tribunals established under Article 169(1) (d) of the Constitution are subordinate courts.