Parliament buildings in Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG The push by Members of Parliament to have a private clinic within Parliament premises is selfish, especially coming at a time the country is reeling from the impact of Covid-19 pandemic. It is ill-timed and the resources can be channelled to other more deserving areas that can benefit Kenyans from all walks of life. MPs want their employer, the Parliamentary Service Commission (PSC), to set up the health unit within Parliament. The MPs say the Parliamentary Health and Wellness Unit should be modelled along those of telecommunications giant Safaricom, the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) and Kenya Pipeline Company (KPC). Under the refurbishment plan, the lawmakers want installation of modern handwashing, sanitisation and foot sanitisation units at the health check unit. The committee is also rooting for internet connectivity at the waiting or reception area and fitting of electronic control doors. At the bathrooms and toilets, the MPs want replacement of gypsum, shower heads and fixing of Muslim-friendly toilets. Our leaders time and again have let us down by allocating taxpayers money to projects that benefit just a few of them and close relatives while the rest of the people are left struggling to pay for the most urgent and essential services and products. The legislators have generous salaries on top of a premium health cover that can afford them services of good hospitals in the country and oversees. The medical insurance also covers all the medical conditions. Kenyan MPs are among top earners in the country, as a result they have a substantial disposable income that can be used for medical emergencies. There are millions of Kenyans who do not have access to basic healthcare and struggle with medical conditions with no hope of getting assistance. Some die without getting to hospitals, or if they did they can’t pay for basic tests and medicines. Therefore, MPs should concentrate on strengthening public health system to improve the quality of service. By so doing, they would not be worried about where to be treated. What the politicians are asking for at the moment is luxury that the country cannot afford.