A trader talks on the phone as he works on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. REUTERS PHOTO Last year, the United States initial public offering (IPO) market was caught in a frenzy with a different way of going public through Special-purpose acquisition companies (SPACs). These are publicly traded entities that raise capital with the explicit purpose of acquiring a private existing business and taking it public. As such, the process allows these companies to sidestep the more onerous regulatory checks of a traditional shares sale. In recent years, going public though a SPAC merger has emerged as an extremely popular liquidity route for tech start-ups. As a result, SPACs have lit up the merger and acquisition (M&A) scene with the global M&A activity now reaching new highs. But with fewer targets to acquire, an increasing number of SPACs are eyeing start-ups in other markets, with the same end-game: Take them public in the US. The big question is are African start-ups positioned to benefit from this revolution? Not at the moment in my considered view. Here are my three reasons. One, not so many start-ups are of size and even fewer command good traction in terms of revenue, reach, valuation and profitability. Only in 2019, did the venture capital market top Sh200 billion in terms of investments, a measure that’s a small fraction compared to other emerging markets. The fact is that the African start-up ecosystem is still young and yet to be fully developed with respect to deal values and volumes. Two; the current liquidity enjoyed in the US markets may soon dry up. It’s widely expected that once the US Federal Reserve begins to “taper” (or reduce the level of its monthly asset purchases) and/or lift its policy rate, much of the high liquidity currently underpinning the SPAC market will be gone. Three; the US industry regulator, SEC, is mulling reining in the SPAC revolution. This could put some curbs that may possibly slow down its frenzied growth and dampen investor enthusiasm. Yet, there was a glimmer of hope when the former Credit Suisse chief executive Tidjane Thiam formed his own blank-check company, Freedom Acquisition, and there was the idea that he should shop for an acquisition within the continent. Well, that did not materialise. The New York Stock Exchange listed SPAC is now in merger talks with two Latin American companies. But Africa managed to squeeze one; African Gold Acquisition Company – the only New York Stock Exchange listed SPAC with links to the continent. But the SPAC is only targeting companies with operations in the gold mining sector. That notwithstanding, many will be watching this one closely. I believe African markets are ready anytime for energy-related SPAC mergers (read oil and gas, renewable energy, etc). To summarise, few Africa tech start-ups are large enough to be ideal targets for SPACs. Generally, companies need to be valued at over Sh100 billion to attract attention for a Sh25 billion SPAC. Additional regulatory scrutiny may cool the industry. In the end, although the SPAC momentum points to a fundamentally strong market looking ahead, unfortunately, Africa start-ups are not ready at this stage. Mr Mwanyasi is managing director at Canaan Capital