A Tanzanian performer during a Singing Wells field trip in 1999. PHOTO | POOL When a group of music researchers, artists, engineers and producers from Kenya and the UK set out to document the music heritage across East Africa in 2011, they didn’t imagine that a decade later this ambitious project would attract millions of online views and connect a network of people around the world who are keen to discover the rich but largely untapped music of the region. How fitting it should be that this unique project is the brainchild of a Kenyan music veteran who last month received an international honour for his contribution to the development and promotion of the country’s music Kenyan producer Tabu Osusa was honoured with The Order of Arts and Letters by the French government. This award came as one of Osusa’s signature projects, Singing Wells, celebrated a landmark 10 million views on its YouTube channel. Singing Wells, which showcases the heritage of traditional music in East Africa is among the projects that the veteran producer and researcher has established to rediscover the rich music traditions across East Africa and reconnect that heritage with the contemporary times. This achievement also coincided with the 10th anniversary of the project that was launched as a collaboration between Osusa’s Ketebul Music and Abubilla Music of the UK. It involves field recordings of the music of different communities as a way of preserving the cultures that are fading with every successive generation. The YouTube channel is dedicated to sharing videos of these recordings. Since 2011, the project has travelled to record the music of communities at the Kenyan coast, Nyanza, Rift Valley, Central and Eastern Kenya, the Northern, Central regions of Uganda, Tanzania and Zanzibar and Pemba in February 2020 when they recorded groups playing taarab and contemporary styles like jazz in Stone Town. “One thing that I have learned and experienced in the past 10 years during the field recordings is that none of the polyrhythmic music and dances performed by musicians from one village to another are similar,” says Osusa. “When you really get to know each community well, then you discover each song has a deep secret and meaning hidden within the beats,” says Osusa. He adds that each community has a unique story to tell and these are expressed through music. James Allen co-founder of Singing Wells says that viewing statistics cannot be looked at without the context of the comments from people who are using the videos to reconnect to their villages. “Teachers are using the videos to teach about the great cultural heritage of these communities,” says Allen. “Parents are showing them to their children. Musicians are sharing them for inspiration. That is what matters and we love how active these communities are supporting their musicians.” One of the most popular videos on the channel is that of Johnston Mukabi, son of legendary Kenyan guitarist George Mukabi performing a rendition of his father’s classic hit “Mtoto Si Nguo” which has been viewed more than 1.9 million views Tabu Osusa says that it is the unique aspects of this song that was first recorded in the 1950s and which generations of people have grown up listening to, that makes it attractive. “It is a very uniquely Kenyan style known as omutibo that was single handedly created by George Mukabi all those years ago.” Bilha Ndirangu, African Leadership Academy chief executive officer. PHOTO | POOL -------- Know Your Dementia Risks As we strive to work harder so that we can enjoy a relaxed, long retirement, it is difficult to visualise life where you are not capable of recognising your loved ones, are unaware of your surroundings and cannot do basic things like dress and feed yourself without assistance. Unfortunately, that is the fate of dementia patients. Dr Sylvia Mbugua, a Neurologist at Aga Khan University Hospital, Nairobi helps shed some light on dementia, the degenerative brain disease that robs people of the joy of sunset years. Is dementia a disease, or simply the process of ageing? Dementia is a neurological disease characterised by deterioration in memory, ability to thinking and make decisions about everyday activities and behaviour change. Although dementia mainly affects older people, it is not a normal part of ageing. “Early onset dementia” is rare but can occur. Is dementia and Alzheimer’s disease one and the same? Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia in people aged over 65 and contributes to about 60 to 70 percent of dementia cases. Dementia can also result from a variety of conditions including chronic alcoholism, stroke, Wilson’s disease, herpes virus and HIV infections, thyroid disease and vitamin deficiency. What are the risk factors? Several things affect your risk of developing dementia – age, genetic factors, certain health factors and your lifestyle. If you have a family history of dementia, you stand a higher risk of developing dementia with time. High blood pressure, obesity, high cholesterol and diabetes are also risk factors for dementia. Studies show that people with one of these conditions during their midlife are about twice as likely to develop dementia later in life. If you have more than one of these conditions, your risk is even higher. Smoking and alcohol also put you at risk. What can one do to reduce the risk? There is little you can do about ageing, or your genes, but you can do something about your health. Keeping your weight within the appropriate bracket, managing blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar at healthy levels are important for your brain. Avoid head injury, smoking and depression. Regularly exercise as well as challenging your brain through cognitive mental and social activities is associated with a lower risk of dementia. A healthy diet, low in red meat and high in Omega 3 fatty acids, coconut and olive oil, lots of fruit and vegetables, nuts, whole grains, legumes and vitamin E is recommended. How do you diagnose dementia? Unfortunately, there is no one test to determine if someone has dementia. Doctors diagnose Alzheimer's and other types of dementia based on a careful medical history, a physical examination, MRI scans and the characteristic changes in thinking, day-to-day function and behaviour associated with each type. Laboratory tests and MRI imaging are also done to exclude other causes of dementia which could be treatable especially in younger patients. What are the symptoms? The early stage of dementia is often overlooked because the onset is gradual and can go on for several years. Although the early signs vary, common symptoms include progressive forgetfulness, losing track of time and inability to recognise familiar places. As dementia progresses to the middle stage, the signs and symptoms become clearer and more restricting. These include becoming forgetful of recent events and people's names, getting lost at home, having increasing difficulty with communication, needing help with personal care, experiencing behaviour changes, including wandering and repeated questioning. The late stage of dementia is one of near total dependence and inactivity. Memory disturbances are serious and the physical signs and symptoms become more obvious. Is the condition treatable? In the case of most progressive dementias, including Alzheimer's disease, there is no cure and no treatment that stops its progression. But, there are drug treatments that may temporarily slow down its progression. Once the neurologist has made a diagnosis, he will advise on medication that can help the patient. Dementia resulting from infective, thyroid problems and vitamin deficiency can be reversed. Caregivers and Society Dementia is one of the major causes of disability and dependency among older people worldwide. It is overwhelming not only for the people who have it, but also for their carergivers and families. The complete change in loved ones from people with strong personalities to dependents, unable to comprehend anything around them and attend to their activities of daily living, takes a big toll on caregivers and families and it is very important to educate and counsel them. There is often a lack of awareness and understanding of dementia in Kenya, resulting in stigmatisation and barriers to diagnosis and care. Often we hear communities branding old people as witches and ostracizing them from their homes because “they are behaving strangely”. People with dementia need care, love and understanding, the same care we accord children. ------- --------