The consignment of 410,000 AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccine doses, that the UK donated to Kenya, is received at the JKIA in Nairobi on July 31, 2021. PHOTO | FRANCIS NDERITU | NMG Kenya plans to innoculate at least 10 million adults by the end of the year. This is part of the larger vaccination plan aimed at covering the entire adult population by the end of 2022. Early this month the government secured Sh21.3 billion from the World Bank to fund the plan. As the country awaits the rollout this month, let us not forget the possible supply chain bottlenecks including environmental repercussions associated with it. There are several challenges identified in the first phase of the vaccination. Hurdles identified include pollution due to poor waste disposal, inadequate storage and handling conditions throughout the cold chain, product safety and counterfeits, shorter shelf life, poor transport infrastructure, facilities and equipment. Supply chain members must entrench sustainability in vaccine distribution, storage, transportation and disposal. This encompasses environmental, social, economic and legal concerns and the recognition of the need for all of us to be involved in the protection of the environment and conservation of natural resources. The disposal of Covid-19-related materials such as highly infectious wastes, vaccine containers, face masks, syringes, gloves and other hazardous materials must be eco-friendly. The Supply chain practitioner’s role, therefore, is to ensure effective storage, handling, and stock management, rigorous temperature control and the maintenance of adequate logistics management information systems. These shall increase the accuracy of supply and demand forecasts to help reduce waste, increase supply chain visibility and responsiveness and enhanced customer service. The World Health Organisation, advises that suitable rigid containers such as validated cool boxes with thermometers) and cool packs should be used at all times to reduce damage to vaccines during transit and to maintain temperature. Apart from a cold storage facility, vaccine distribution would ordinarily require well-developed road infrastructure to enable access to the remote parts of Kenya and for efficiency. In developed economies, light air cargo plays a key role in the distribution of these vaccines, especially in the areas not accessible by road for maximum reach. Therefore, for successful rollout, supply chain professionals must play an integral role in the transportation, shipping and receiving, import and export operations, warehousing, inventory management of the vaccine. In short, supply chain leaders must develop a streamlined and resilient service centred approach to vaccine distribution. A strong supply chain management team is critical for vaccine distribution because of the vast amounts of data, insights, processes and technology solutions involved. Lastly, to ensure success, all stakeholders must be involved in addressing hesitancy, fear and myths surrounding the vaccine. They should also mitigate unintended situations and instil public trust and confidence by creating adequate awareness and ensure the public gets accurate information about the vaccine.