Justice James Wakiaga. FILE PHOTO | NMG The High Court has granted a senior official at a public roads agency accused of amassing close to Sh1 billion in unexplained wealth seven days to respond to an application seeking to compel him to forfeit the assets to the State. Justice James Wakiaga gave the direction in a case where Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC) wants Benson Muteti Musila, a regional manager at the Kenya Rural Roads Authority, to surrender to the State property including cash in 22 bank accounts, schools, cars, and shares. EACC claims the assets are part of unexplained wealth worth Sh952.3 million. Justice Wakiaga said seven days was sufficient for Mr Musila to make submissions and also granted the EACC time to file a counter-application ahead of October 5 when all the fillings would be reviewed. The judge also extended orders barring Mr Musila and his spouse Zipporah Mwongeli from interfering with the properties, pending the determination of the case. Other than the money, shares, land, and apartments, EACC is also targeting commercial and residential plots, two schools -- Mumbe Junior Academy and Mumbe Girls High School, four vehicles, and a hardware shop. The EACC claims that most of the properties were acquired corruptly through kickbacks from state tenders. The commission was initially targeting more than Sh1.03 billion but Mr Musila satisfactorily explained properties with a cumulative value of Sh78.7 million. The EACC says the bank accounts holding Sh567.63 million and the real estate property in Nairobi, Makueni and Kilifi counties could not have been built by his monthly salary of Sh390,000. The EACC said multiple deposits had been made into Mr Musila’s 21 KCB bank accounts and an account each at Cooperative Bank, NBK and Absa Bank. The anti-graft agency suspects the deposits were from contractors either seeking favours or paying back for jobs already awarded. Mr Musila, however, maintained that the banks held cash meant to pay staff and finance general office administration. He said that being the regional manager, his salary coupled with supervisory allowances of not less than Sh750,000 a month meant that he would take home about Sh1.14 million. The EACC dismissed the claims arguing the pay did not reflect in his returns filed with the Kenya Revenue Authority.