Companies can achieve growth either internally or externally. When growth is achieved through internal improvements and process realignment, such organisations realise organic growth. This applies when the growth is driven by optimisation of processes including increasing output, enhancing sales, improving cost management, reallocation of resources, and new product offerings. Conversely, inorganic growth strategies can be attributable to activities outside a business's own operations such as mergers and acquisitions. However, inorganic growth strategies are risky and may include loss of control to the detriment of existing owners. Companies and organisations seeking to pursue growth strategies therefore usually opt for organic growth and this could partly explain why mergers and acquisitions occur only after very careful considerations. It is not in dispute that companies give organic growth strategies first priority when looking at opportunities to grow and provide adequate returns to owners. That said, a question then arises as to how then can companies get the most out of organic growth strategies. One popular and most conspicuous organic growth approaches has been implementing new projects. The aim of new projects is to increase production output with existing product lines or introducing new product offerings, with the goal of achieving increased sales output. We can easily measure organic growth when we compare, year over year revenues, comparable sales and production output. Organic growth therefore is incremental and linear in nature and can at times be very predictable, but is rarely satisfactory to owners of capital. It also takes a lot of resources to sustain constant growth. A company adds new resources such as capital, people, or technology and its revenue increases as a result. But, the real increase is the additional revenue minus the incremental costs, whose results can at times be only marginal. Most times the increase in growth is in single digit and not substantial enough to satisfy shareholder expectations. Thus, contemporary management practices currently focus on growth strategies that not only achieve organic or linear growth, but that are capable of scaling and achieving something like exponential growth. Companies achieve scale when revenue can increase significantly without incurring significant costs. While adding customers and revenue exponentially, costs should only increase incrementally, if at all. A good project choice is therefore that which is capable of scaling. Such projects will be profitable at 40percent capacity utilisation, and utilisation can increase to say 80 percent without further substantial financial outlay. In order to choose scalable projects, companies need to develop a robust process of identifying, analysing and selecting quality projects. The projects so chosen must have some elasticity to satisfy increasing demand without additional substantial financial outlay in the short to immediate term. It is reasonable to assume that a project that has gone through market research, has undergone a rigorous feasibility analysis and is implemented by seasoned experts must of necessity be capable of scaling. These five steps can therefore help companies implement scalable projects and achieve exponential growth. ALIGN CONCEPT AND PROJECT TO COMPANY’S VISION The first level basic test is to have a mind play and resonate the idea or concept to the overall vision of the organisation. If the two are not aligned, then the idea should be dropped at this stage. It is of no point allocating resources to an idea that goes contrary to the belief system of the owners of the organization. If the idea is properly aligned to the vision, then a company can now move to the next step of market survey. Market survey is the research and analysis of the market for a particular product or service which includes the investigation into customer inclinations. Market Survey involves collecting all relevant commercial, environmental and behavioral responses to the new product or service. Market Surveys are tools to directly collect feedback from the target customer to understand their characteristics, expectations, and requirements Companies can develop new and exciting strategies for upcoming products but there can be no assurance about the success of these strategies. For these to be successful, companies should determine the category and features of products that the target market will readily accept. By doing so, the success of a new avenue can be assured. The feedback received from these surveys can be contributory in product marketing and feature enhancement. PROJECT BUSINESS PLAN When you are now properly armed with a market survey report, you are now in a better position to prepare a project business plan and review the financial and commercial viability of the project. A project business plan is a written document that describes in detail the market size, anticipated pricing, marketing costs, incremental labor costs, project profitability and project cash flows. With a well prepared business plan, you will now answer questions like whether the cost of the project can be recovered within a reasonable time frame, whether the customer base is big enough to make the venture profitable and also address any other risks identified during market research. The business plan will lay out all conceivable costs mapped against the income to show probable profits over the projected life. Projects with highest profitability and cash generation potential will always be preferred. FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS Organic growth or scale strategies involve breakthrough ideas, concepts and recommendations some of which may have quiet unfavorable implementation outcomes. We therefore recommend feasibility analysis on such novel ideas to test the potential financial impact and risk bearing before fulltime implementation is rolled out. New projects and ideas implemented without strong financial and commercial analysis usually turn out bad, to the detriment of organization’s cash flows and bottom line. Good project feasibility analysis must be capable to demonstrate scaling ability. When handling long-lived assets, feasibility analysis must include an investment analysis and appraisal that clearly shows a project’s payback period and the project’s economic and commercial viability using net present value and other risk based discounting methods. Here some technical issues are involved and depending on amounts involved in the project, use of expert advice is highly recommended. EXPERIENCED IMPLEMENTERS Well, to succeed quickly, you need to use skilled human resource that is properly tested and proven. There is no point investing so much time, effort and capital only to leave that at the mercy of the novice manager. When implementing critical ideas, concepts and projects and where companies target to have a higher implementation rate of success we implore companies to make use of experienced and licensed professionals