Signage at Tatu City. FILE PHOTO | NMG The Employment and Labour Relations Court has awarded a former chief executive at real estate developer Tatu City Limited Sh27.5 million for wrongful sacking. The court ruled that the firm’s board of directors dismissed Lucas Akungu Omariba irregularly and failed to provide a reason for the sacking. Justice Onesmus Makau said Sections 43 and 45 of the Employment Act require an employer to prove the reason(s) for termination of employment. He said the company failed to discharge the burden of proof that the firing of the CEO was lawful and fair. The CEO was sacked in February 2015 over alleged gross insubordination to the board of directors, absenteeism, and breach of confidentiality and the duty of fidelity. As a result of which the relationship between the parties had deteriorated with time. Christopher John Barron from Rendeavour Limited, the controlling shareholder of Tatu City, testified that the CEO was asked for information by Rendeavour but refused to give the information, which amounted to insubordination, and consequently, he was dismissed. He further testified that the CEO made negative comments towards Rendeavour’s directors and staff. However, he admitted that the termination letter did not cite any reasons for the sacking. At the time of the dismissal of the CEO, Mr Barron was the Tatu City operations manager reporting to the CEO. Counter-claim Mr Barron told the court that because of the friction among the directors, it was difficult to conduct a meaningful disciplinary hearing on the allegations against Mr Omariba. In its counter-claim in court, the company alleged that after being sacked Mr Omariba retained company property, including electronic information, correspondence, and documents and had refused to return them despite demand. It further contended that following the termination, he deliberately contravened the confidentiality of his employment contract by divulging and sharing sensitive information about the firm with third parties. It sought orders for the return of property owed to it, including all electronic information, correspondence, and documents relating to the company contained in his laptop unconditionally. The property includes two mobile phones, iPhone 5s and Apple iPhone 5c. The company urged the court to alternatively order he pays a sum of money equivalent to the replacement costs. Mr Omariba did not respond to the counter-claim. The company also sought a permanent injunction restraining Mr Omariba from breaching the confidentiality clause. However, the court declined to issue the injunction. The judge said the company did not demonstrate the information at stake and the risk to its business. The judge also declined to order the return of the property described by the company as “electronic information, correspondence and documents”. Justice Makau said the company did not plead with precision. Concerning the two mobile phones, the court directed Mr Omariba to return the handsets or instead pay the company half the purchase price of both iPhone 5s and iPhone 5c as the replacement cost because he had used the devices for the business of the company.