City Hall. FILE PHOTO | NMG You will be now charged Sh10,000 or face six months behind bars for blowing your nose without a handkerchief or tissue paper, or spitting on a footpath in Nairobi. Further, residing or sleeping in a kitchen or room in which food is prepared or stored for sale will attract a fine not exceeding Sh50,000, a six-month prison term, or both with subsequent offence attracting a fine not exceeding Sh100, 000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or both. The new development comes after acting Nairobi Governor Ann Kananu signed into law the Nairobi City County Public Nuisance Bill, 2020. The new Act has introduced a set of new rules and regulations aimed at keeping the capital city clean by controlling public nuisances. The Bill, passed by the county assembly last year September, was sponsored by Riruta MCA James Kiriba. Among the new regulations are urinating in undesignated spaces, knowingly living wholly or partly on the earnings of prostitution, discharging of dirty water, sewer or effluent into streets or water channels, discharge of oils into roads or water channels, and obstruction of roads or streets. It also prohibits residents from allowing trees and hedges in their homes or places of work to obstruct streets or footpaths. It criminalises riding motorcycles or driving on footpaths, playing loud music, and smoking in undesignated places. Riding a motorcycle or driving a vehicle on a footpath will henceforth be considered a public nuisance and an offence on public roads and streets. In the same breadth, defecating or urinating on the street or any open space as well as lighting any fire on any public road or street without the consent of the county secretary will now be considered an offence. Leaving a dog to litter a public road or street; washing, repairing or dismanting a vehicle except in the case of an emergency in the central business district; allowing any animal in the street as well as smoking cigarettes in public places and touting for passengers will henceforth be considered public nuisance. Hawking, selling, distributing or advertising any article or event on any public road or street, shouting or using any bell, gong, loudspeaker or other noisy instrument or driving any vehicle for the purpose of exhibiting advertisements without statutory authority will also attract punishment. This is similar to playing any game in such a manner as to cause damage to property or cause injury to any person. “Any person who commits an offence under this section is liable, upon conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine of not more than Sh10, 000 or both,” reads in part the bill. The Bill bans Keeping animals or poultry, which are a nuisance in the neighbourhood. Public place means any square, building, park, recreational ground or open space which is vested in the Nairobi County government, the public has the right to use or is shown as a public place on the general plan of the county. Ms Kananu called upon Nairobi residents to familiarise themselves with the new law to avoid being caught offside.