A pedestrian walk past the National Treasury building in Nairobi on June 12, 2014. FILE PHOTO | NMG Kenya is estimated to have saved Sh99.73 billion in deferred repayments for its external debt in the last financial year, according to Treasury data. Expenditure on servicing external loans amounted to Sh234.59 billion compared to Sh334.32 billion that had initially been budgeted. The debt suspension came as a relief to government because revenue collection target was missed by Sh115.9 billion, lifting pressure on the government to meet its obligations. DEBT SERVICING But there are still concerns that the government has not handled the rising public debt problem well, with debt servicing now taking more than half of domestic revenue. Debt is simply crowding out capital in the economy and affecting its productivity potential. But how long will Kenya be given relief by rich countries to ease the debt servicing burden? It is expected that the debt suspension will not go past this financial year whilst Kenya has not restructured its debt to lift pressure on the tax payer. So, the question Kenyans will be grappling with post-Covid is how to address the rising debt servicing cost which is running to unsustainable levels. Already some presidential candidates have started the conversation on how they will handle the rising debt problem. There are three ways to handle debt. First is government raising taxes when debt levels rise or debt comes due. The problem with raising taxes is that it reduces household incomes in two ways: directly through the tax payments and indirectly through the deadweight loss that arises as taxes distort incentives. The second option is to cut spending to free up funds to pay the debt. The problem with this option is that it carries a high risk of the economy contracting, leading to the debt ratios increasing and making it challenging to address the debt problem. The third option is for the economy to grow its way out of the debt without the government having to increase taxes or cut spending, though it is a big gamble. The government has to ensure that the GDP growth is higher than interest rate over time and that the ratio of debt to GDP falls over time. With debt becoming negligible relative to the size of the economy, the government can freely roll over the debt forever even as its size grows. So, essentially the economy can grow its way out of debt. The reason this option is a gamble is because if the GDP growth rate drops below the interest rate for a sustained period, the policy of rolling over the debt will cause the debt to rise faster than national income, making debt large relative to the economy such that the government will have a difficulty addressing it, forcing a tax increase or spending cut. So, if the government opts for this route, it has to reduce budget deficit while the debt is still moderate, and the economy is healthy. And many governments have got away with this gamble. In Kenya, we have seen pundits and politicians propose the three options as our debt sustainability programme. I believe the third option is worth the gamble because with the negative effects of the pandemic, we can’t afford to raise taxes or cut spending. What we need is to keep the economy on a sustainable growth path. One of the serious concerns about Kenya’s debt portfolio is the commercial debt aspect (the Eurobonds), which pose high risks. In the medium term, we will have to find ways to cut our appetite for the Eurobonds to manage our public debt. Uganda, for example, has no Eurobonds on its debt portfolio and so no rolling over burden, making it easier for them to handle its public debt unlike Kenya. This shouldn’t be taken as a pass on government spending currently though. We still need the government to cut profligate spending and wastage, and that should also be on the agenda of the next administration.