Ibrahim Odie makes interlocking blocks at his workstation in Awasi, Kisumu County on July 10, 2021. NMG PHOTO With the skills he has acquired through YouTube, Ibrahim Odie is capitalising on the craze for new homes and keeping hopes alive. It all started from a mere Google search on the most suitable and cost-effective housing construction solution for his family. After rummaging through the cyberspace, the use of interlocking blocks popped up as the ideal way to build a permanent house compared to the masonry stone and traditional brick. “I realised that the technology would bring down my construction cost by between 30 to 40 per cent,” said Mr Odie. He later linked up with a company based on Kangundo Road in Nairobi who which fabricates the interlocking blocks machine. As an added benefit of buying the interlocking block machines from them, they offered him a free one-week practical demonstration of how to build the critical building material. “From what I accumulated as a peasant farmer, I used my savings of Sh18,000 to buy a machine,” the Class Eight drop out told the Enterprise. Fortunately for him, his neighbour in Awasi, Kisumu County, kicked off his fortunes when he approached him and ordered 3,000 bricks to complete his three-bedroom house. “He bought quarry dust and cement which are the only ingredients for making the building material at his site,” said Mr Odie. The machine shaped in size 6 by 9 inch compresses a mixture of quarry dust, water and cement to produce solid blocks. “To avoid cracking, the blocks need to be placed in direct sunlight and require curing for at least one week before they are ready for use,” he said. Each block has a projection at one end and a depression at the other. The projection of one block fits into the depression of the next so that they always align perfectly, thereby eliminating the need for mortar to bind the wall. “No cement is needed to join the blocks together as they interlock and make the wall stronger,” he said. Mr Odie has employed two workers and makes between 240 to 300 blocks in a day. Housing boom He sells each for Sh45 but prospective home owners can opt to cut down the cost by buying the raw materials themselves and having the blocks made at their construction site. “Other than saving on production and transportation costs, this will reduce cases of breakage of blocks,” he said, adding that a tonne of quarry dust goes for Sh850. For every five wheelbarrows of quarry dust, Mr Odie said they use one bag of cement which in turn produces 30 blocks. The 40-year-old who uses his social media accounts to market his product has strategically placed himself to tap on the housing boom in Kisumu City and the larger Western Kenya. “Our mobile operation is giving us an edge over our competitors,” he said. He, however hopes that his vision of acquiring a hydraulic machine will enable him produce up to 1,000 bricks in a day and reach a wider market. The modern building technology also addresses both environmental and economic challenges of traditional bricks which has created high demand for trees used as firewood to burn them and causing serious deforestation.