Singapore flagged vessel Mv NYK Clara docks at the Port of Mombasa. FILE PHOTO | NMG The amount of money that Kenya is spending on importing maize, wheat, and rice has hit a record high and it will keep going up if measures are not put in place. Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) data shows traders ordered cereals, live farm animals for slaughter and breeding, and beverages at a value of Sh103.34 billion between January and June this year. This is Sh12.35 billion, or 13.57 percent, more than the Sh91 billion that was spent on food imports last year. This is a huge amount of money, especially at a time households are grappling with the high cost of living and the drought threatens to wipe out next season's harvest, meaning that Kenya will be forced to import more to avert widespread hunger. Now it is up to the government to fix the high import bill. First, let the Ministry of Agriculture do an audit of the strategic grain reserve, see the deficit, and start importation early when prices are low, instead of waiting when other countries in the region will be rushing to buy from Uganda and Tanzania at higher prices. Secondly, scale up irrigation and water harvesting to increase crop yields, improve resilience to climate shocks, to start the journey to being a self-reliant nation. Thirdly, the Ministry of Agriculture needs to start improving the breeding programmes so that farmers are not forced to import sheep, goats, cattle, and piglets from markets such as South Africa and Uganda. Over the years, the quality of animals available locally has reduced, and the cost of feeds has been continuously skyrocketing, meaning that breeders and commercial farmers have to buy high-yielding breeds from neighbouring countries, then pass on the additional costs to consumers when the animals are ready for slaughter. The unattractive prices locally have also forced livestock farmers to export to markets such as Dubai, which offer better prices, leading to a shortage and forcing some abattoirs to import. But even as the government looks to the early, cheaper imports to act as a buffer, let it ensure that it does not trigger a crisis that will be exploited by cartels to flood the market with low-quality food and hurt local farmers.