What is the ideal diet for good mental development and health in children? I have had all sorts of theories from sea foods to steamed foods. *** As a young medical student in the 70s, one of my teachers accused me of answering questions in class like a politician. That was because in my view, the reply depended on many factors and context, and therefore, just as was the case then, the answer to your question depends on many factors, including the age of the child and availability or otherwise of various types of food. For example, for a newborn baby, the best meal by far is breast milk in that it contains all the ingredients required for it in proportions determined by nature as being prefect for that age. When you add the fact that breast milk is without contaminants then you understand perfection in the meal for an infant. At the other extreme, the growing brain of a 10-year-old will not thrive on breast milk alone, and so the answer to your question is that it depends on the age of the growing brain. When Adam and Eve got their children, they somehow knew what to do with them right from infancy until they were fully grown. Who taught them the right diet for their children? Similarly, our fore mothers found a way of giving just enough for us to grow on. Who taught them how to balance the diets of their children? One would expect that the Eskimos and or the dwellers of the tropical forests of Africa and Brazil would have some challenges finding the right diet for their children because the available foods are so different in the two locations. We know, however, that in both places are to be found perfectly heathy children. The available foods are so different in the two areas! So, coming back to your question in a sense, is the question of how mothers in general know what is best for their children in their environment. Going back to medical school for a moment, our practical public health classes were carried out in Machakos county. We were required to study the dietary habits of the people of the area, in particular expectant mothers and their children. To our shock and horror, we found that many mothers were selling the foods with the greatest nutritional value, including legumes and eggs to buy their children bread and rice because these were the more “modern” foods that teachers and other learned people were giving their families. Ours was to train the people on the benefits of traditional diets that included milk for their young ones. More than 50 later, our dietary problems continue with our grandchildren, who have been indoctrinated by the fast foods industry that has now taught them that highly processed foods and drinks are the way to a modern western life. As we all sadly know, one of the consequences of theses fast foods is a new epidemic of childhood obesity in the western world, an epidemic that is steadily finding its way into our continent. This is also a continent in which many children are in dire need of food. Again, going back to our days in medical school and public health and indeed clinical years, we witnessed a condition, now not often seen (I hope) called protein calorie malnutrition. In this condition, the child has a huge belly with very thin hands and legs. Their hair is thin and often turning brown and such children stand in testimony of the failure of the responsibilities of the adults in their charge. Such children are (sadly) to be found in large numbers among refugees, and other displaced people in war zones. Very sadly, the damage done to the growing brains of such children can be irreversible. So, every time we see a loud-mouthed politician beating the drums of war in our midst, let us remember the innocent boys and girls with large bellies and brown hair who will result in their irresponsible conduct. Two last things are worth recording in answer to your question. The first is that (like covid-19 vaccine) there is no absolute shortage but rather the problem is that of poor or selfish distribution channels and mechanisms. Secondly, one of the most rapidly growing health problems in the world is obesity among children and finally, if adequate food is made available, both the children and their mothers know how to give a balanced diet. If you do not believe me ask your great, great, grandmother how she managed to bring up healthy children without the help of modern dietery books.