Auditor General Nancy Gathungu. PHOTO | LUCY WANJIRU | NMG The Auditor-General has criticised the Unclaimed Financial Assets Authority (Ufaa) for its poor record in reunifying uncollected salaries, pension dues, matured policies, bank deposits, and royalties with claimants. Auditor-General Nancy Gathungu said the agency was not doing enough to link the unclaimed assets with owners in line with its mandate. “Although there has been improvement in the reunification rate of assets with the beneficiaries, from a low of less than one percent in 2017, the rate is still significantly low and standing at 2.7 percent as of 30 June 2020,” said Ms Gathungu in her review of Ufaa books. According to the Auditor-General, the Ufaa blamed the situation on legal bottlenecks. The Business Daily could not immediately establish the highlighted specific legal gaps and proposals blamed on the slow absorption by agency by press time. “Management has attributed the slow pace to the Unclaimed Financial Assets Regulations 2016, which do not adequately support the unification.” Unclaimed cash, shares, and dividends surrendered to a State agency crossed the Sh50 billion mark by as of December as investors including tycoons show disinterest in reclaiming the idle assets. Ufaa revealed earlier the idle assets stood at Sh51.4 billion in December, up from Sh43 billion in June, reflecting a growth of 19 percent. Many Kenyans, said the authority, remain disinterested in pursuing funds legally belonging to them or their families. Billionaire business owners, former powerful government officials, and prominent politicians are on the long list of individuals whose shares worth Sh31.9 billion have been surrendered to the Treasury, up from Sh26.3 billion in June and Sh16.42 in 2017. The authority reckons it had received Sh19.9 billion cash in local and foreign currencies up from Sh16.7 billion in June. Surrendered safe boxes that are believed to contain jewellery, title deeds, share certificates, and Treasury bills rose to 1,953 units from 1,592 in June. So far, the authority has received 6,000 claims and reunited shares and cash worth Sh1 billion with beneficiaries, representing 1.9 percent of the unclaimed assets. Unclaimed assets include money in bank accounts that have been dormant for more than five years, bankers' cheques not cashed, and contents in safe deposit boxes unclaimed for more than two years. Reporting and surrender of unclaimed financial assets by all holders is mandatory and is due on or before November 1 every year. Holders are encouraged to file nil returns if applicable.