Second hand cars being offloaded from a Cargo Ship at the Port of Mombasa. FILE PHOTO | NMG Logistics performance of a country is a strong determinant of economic growth. Understanding the components of logistics performance is fundamental to addressing the impacts of logistic activities, quality and efficiency of transport systems, reduction in freight expenses, efficiency of the customs clearance, supply chain visibility and timely deliveries. The International Logistics Performance Index (LPI) looks at six dimensions that capture the most important aspects of countries’ trade logistics performance. They are efficiency of the customs clearance, quality of trade and transport infrastructure, ease of arranging competitively priced shipments, competence and quality of logistics services, tracking consignments, and the frequency with which shipments reach the consignee. According to the World Bank, Kenya‘s logistics performance has deteriorated in recent years from an overall global ranking (LPI) of 42nd in 2016, to 63rd position in 2018. Cargo handling volume of Mombasa port has been increasing but delays in cargo clearance and congestion have been the painful gaps. The construction of the port of Lamu, the refurbishment of Kisumu port, the standard gauge railway, the Naivasha inland container depot, the expansion of various roads and building of bypasses, and the Nairobi expressway are among the recent interventions. Many multinationals looking to expand into Eastern Africa region are looking at Kenya as their preferred entry point. However, persistent traffic snarl-ups, erratic fuel cost and operating costs covering inspections and certifications, longer lead times, high custom tariffs, bureaucratic customs and taxation policies, and congestion at ports due to delayed clearance are derailing Kenya. Others are increased storage costs and demurrage, archaic inventory control methods, and poor supply chain visibility. Kenyan ports are facing stiff competition from regional harbours such the recent expansion of Barbera port in Somaliland and the planned revival of Bagamoyo in Tanzania. Uganda is the biggest market for Kenyan goods and the top client especially for transit cargo. The recent decision by Uganda to start its oil imports through Dar-es Salaam is a wake up call to improve customs clearance time. The Customs clearance component of the LPI measures the efficiency and effectiveness of dispatch procedures in terms of speed, simplicity and predictability. The handling of cargo in our ports should be as fast and efficient as possible. Reducing the variability of customs clearance time is an important element for improving the efficiency of international supply chains. Supply chains are becoming more complex, and there are no easy gains available for policymakers. Supply chains must be secured against man-made or natural disruptions. To enhance international trade connectivity, Kenya must continue to invest significant resources in developing efficient ports, waterways and hinterland transport networks.