Daniel Njoroge's Mother and Child on display at Village Market on August 1, 2021. PHOTO | MARGARETTA WA GACHERU | NMG Artists came in droves to celebrate ‘Art in the Open’ at Village Market. More than 60 flooded both ends of one of Kenya’s first proper shopping malls with a wide variety of works. Both old and new wings of Village were literally filled with contemporary Kenyan art. The scene wasn’t so much an exhibition as an eruption of artworks featuring mostly young, up-and-coming artists, like Sammy Soli, 18, who’s still a student in Thika at Mt Kenya University; Francis Muriithi, 24, whose role model is Leonardo da Vinci and who paints garden scenes on denim jackets and handbags; and Daisy Bilenzi, 25, who with Joyce Kuria, 27, and Husna Nyawira, 24, came to Village with not only paintings and prints, but also hand-painted fridge magnets, bookmarks, stickers, and pins. There were also several older, more established artists, including Naftali Momanyi, who heads the Kenya National Visual Artists Association. “I came with a dozen of our members,” said the acclaimed sculptor who brought his own pieces, like the Kisii stone sculpture he’d entitled ‘Mutual Dialogue’. Dennis Muraguri another well-established artist showcased his matatu prints and screen-printed bags. His works were well-represented by his former intern and Kenyatta University graduate, Becky Bulimo, who displayed her miniature woodcut prints alongside his. And even Daniel Njoroge, 67, the mature painter who several young artists said had inspired them, was represented by his son Elijah. “I was inspired by my dad, but I’m a graphic designer who prefers painting abstract works whereas his art is realistic,” said the son. The vast majority of artists interviewed on the last day of the four-day event from July 31 admitted they’d been mentored by more experienced artists, like Peter Ngugi, Patrick Mukabi or Michelangelo himself. A few referred to YouTube as their best teaching tool. Some had diplomas or degrees from art schools like Kenyatta University, Creative Arts Centre, Buru Buru Institute of Fine Art or Mwangaza Art College in Kisumu. The one thing they all had in common was enthusiasm and passion for art. Most had exhibited before, in venues like Nairobi National Museum during the Affordable Art Fair, in commercial spaces like Tazama Gallery, and in other shopping malls like Sarit Centre which has a monthly weekend show similar to ‘Art in the Open’. Several of the 60 exhibiting artists had shown their art in new art spaces that are small, struggling, but hopeful about their future prospects. These include venues like Studio Soko in South C and Kino Art Gallery. “There are eight of us that started Kino Gallery because we wanted to try something new,” said Nephat Njihia, 25, a graduate of the now-defunct Creative Arts Centre. “We had thought of linking up with Banana Hill Gallery but decided to go it alone,” Njihia added. “We also teach at Kino, since we want young people to be exposed and aware of the value of art as they grow up.” One young artist who’s been inspired by Kino Gallery is Jimmy Mumbo who comes every month from Kwale County to show his art both at Kino and at Sarit Centre. “It’s worth making the trip because I’ve been making a living with my art for several years,” Mumbo said. Art rendezvous, like ‘Art in the Open’, have enabled artists to survive the pandemic restrictions (by being outdoors and everyone wearing masks) and still earn a living.