Mr Amos Wangora, the acting chief executive of KenTrade. PHOTO | DIANA NGILA The process of licensing agricultural goods for export and import between Kenya and East African countries will now be significantly enhanced following the launch of a new digital system. Traders will now be required to register with Food Authority (AFA) under the newly launched integrated management information system (AFA-IMIS). The platform seeks to speed the process of certification and licensing of trade in cash crops by more than a half from the current 30 days Kentrade Chief Executive Officer Amos Wangora said the new single window system has created simple procedures for exporters and will be providing export information online. Mr Wangora said coffee export steps have been cut from 96 to 62 and the process to reduce redundant procedures is ongoing. "The system allows both importers and exporters to lodge standardised information and documents with a single entry point to fulfill all import, export and transit related regulatory requirements. The system has reduced time needed to gather information on foreign trade from an average of 10 days to a just a click of the button," said Mr Wangora. More than 13,000 exporters and importers using different ports in Kenya will be expected to start using this system. AFA-IMIS has integrated payment platforms which provide guarantee of services through end-to-end processing of applications and already more 4500 permits/licences and certificates have been issued through the system since its operationalisation started in January 2020. The system has been integrated with the Kenya Revenue Authorities’ (KRA) Integrated Customs Management System (iCMS) for seamless exchange of cargo clearance data including scheduling of joint verification messages with Partner Government Agencies (PGAs). The system has an inbuilt dash board to facilitate importers to monitor progress of clearance of their goods. AFA Director General Kello Harsama said the current impasse on the ban of importation of maize from Uganda and Tanzania will now be resolved since all traders will be registered to ensure accountability. "AFA has to protect Kenyans from harmful products and whoever intends to do business with us in cash crops including tea, coffee, nuts, oils, sugar, horticulture, flowers, cotton, sisal, pyrethrum, food crops and other industrial crops must be registered. “The system will reduce the number of days of registering and licensing from about a month to less than 14 days," said Mr Harsama during the launch of the system last week. "As AFA we are not only concerned with food that is coming into Kenya, but also food that is being produced in Kenya. Soon we will start surveillance on food grown in Kenya like tomatoes, to enforce regulations on pesticide use and ensure food supplied to markets from our farms is fit for human consumption." The system which was developed by AFA and TradeMark East Africa (TMEA), will also see procedures of importing and exporting agriculture products reduced significantly with exporters of coffee being the first beneficiaries to the system. Denmark funded the development of the system with a contribution of Sh13 million. The project is also part of TMEA's contribution to the Kenya government's digitisation agenda, having supported development of over 15 online systems in government agencies. Royal Danish Embassy Counsellor, Morgen Strunge Larsen said his country is committed to support Kenyas’ green trade efforts and the continued fight against Covid-19. Mr Moses Opiyo, one of the tea packers in Mombasa, said the system is efficient and already users have been trained on it, noting that there has been no user-end complaints. On September 10, 2020, National Treasury CS Ukur Yatani made it mandatory for importers under the East African Community Duty Remission Scheme to lodge their applications online through the Kenya TradeNet System. The overall aim of the system, Mr Yatani said, is to reduce time taken to clear goods, cost of doing business in the country, and thus increase Kenya’s “World Bank ease of doing business ranking and making us competitive in the international arena”.