Dairy farmers in Western Kenya are boosting their milk production while cutting down on their expenses by growing drought-resilient forage grasses. The forage grasses are part of a research in the region where scientists have been working with farmers to test 10 new varieties of grasses that are higher in protein, lower in fibre and mature faster. The grasses can boost both the quality and quantity of milk, researchers say. Dickson Osogo, a dairy farmer in Siaya County, joined the research work two years ago. The farmer recounts that before starting to grow own fodder, he struggled with high commercial feed prices and poor quality Napier grass to feed his three cows. He would later joined the research project out of curiosity and now, having attended trainings and tried new planting, farm management and feeding methods, he has bought two more cows and set aside half an acre on his farm to cultivate the grasses. “When I first planted the cultivars and fed them to my cows alongside Napier, I noticed the cows preferred the cultivars,” explains Mr Osogo. “This motivated me to expand the area under production. Now I have recorded an increase of up to six litres of milk per cow from milking twice per day.” The farmer says the fodders mature in 10 weeks after planting. The project, which is known as Grass to Cash, is an initiative of the Alliance of Bioversity International and the International Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) and has engaged more than 1,000 farmers in Siaya, Kakamega, Bungoma and Busia counties since 2018. The Kenya Agriculture and Livestock Research Organization (Kalro) tested the grasses for suitability in local conditions before they were released to farmers. Ruth Odhiambo, a senior research assistant at the Alliance who worked with farmers to test the new grass varieties, says shortage of fodders is one of the biggest challenges facing smallholder dairy farmers in Western Kenya. According to her, up to 80 percent of farmers in the region rely on Napier, which has serious disease problems, hindering grass production. “Finding quality grasses and seed with high protein content, which could translate to improved milk yields and incomes, has been a real challenge for farmers,” she notes. David Miano, a forage agronomist at Kalro, notes that there is need to explore how “we can convert what we are researching on into a money making activity. We have worked with development partners and farmer organisations to disseminate the forages, and each partner has had a crucial role to play in making these new grasses available to as many farmers as possible.” The research institutions have partnered with Advantage Crops, a seed company, to commercialise some of the new forage seed varieties, making them more easily available to farmers within shorter distances and addressing seed shortages. They have also repackaged the seed into more affordable sizes, from 50 gram packs to one kilogramme packs which vary in price from between Sh3,700 and Sh4,000 per kilo ($33-36) depending on the variety. Charles Wasonga, a director at Advantage Crops, says the move is a great opportunity for farmers, whether they own cows or land, to step forward and venture into “a different direction,” in which their farming enterprises can be profitable. “There is need to intensify these campaigns so that more of the potential beneficiaries can experience what the alternative fodders can offer,” he adds.