The ongoing construction of Nairobi Expressway to the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport, along Mombasa Road in this picture taken on November 8, 2020. PHOTO | DENNIS ONSONGO | NMG As Covid-19 outbreak continues to wreak havoc, most contractual agreements are left in jeopardy. Most individuals, firms and governments are unable to honour their contractual agreements due the social-economic effects of the pandemic. These contractual agreements include rents, loan repayments, procurement contract execution, long-term infrastructure contracts, construction, honouring Bills of Exchange facilities and simple trade credits, that is I Owe You (IOU), and promissory notes. The Vision 2030 aims to transform Kenya into a newly industrialised middle-income country, through modern network of roads, railways, ports, airports, water and sanitation facilities, and telecommunications. A nation’s properly developed infrastructure puts it on a competitive edge in terms of economic growth and development. Public-private partnerships (PPPs) provide governments the opportunity of delivering huge infrastructural projects that would have otherwise been impossible through normal fiscal policy tools. Most PPPs are contracts between the public and private sector involving private participation and risk sharing in various stages of the infrastructure project lifecycle, including facility design, construction, financing, operations, and maintenance. Covid-19 pandemic has impacted negatively the short-term viability of most public-private partnerships (PPPs). The financial impact of Covid-19 on the economy may mean that certain contractual obligations can no longer be met by contacting parties, for instance the construction of the Nairobi-Mombasa dual carriage, dualling of Nairobi-Nakuru road, Nairobi Expressway, JKIA  second  terminal, Nairobi commuter rail project, Kisumu seaport and other Lake Victoria ports among other PPP projects may delay or be discharged through the instrument of breach. According to the World Bank, between 2012-2020, the total infrastructure investment needs across the 12 sectors amounted to $ 62,176 million, with Kenya providing $25,000 million thus leaving a funding gap of $37,000 million. With a projected reduction in the funding gap for infrastructure estimated at $40 billion over the next eight years, the Kenya government is keener on PPPs as the demand for quality from its citizen’s increases. Various studies on the effects of Covid 19 on PPPs list a number of constraints including delays in project preparation and tenders, reduced bidder interest in PPP projects, lenders’ natural caution extending time needed to achieve financial close, construction delays due to supply chain disruptions for imported equipment and materials, requests from contractors to invoke force majeure clauses in PPP contracts, user-pays projects, especially in the transport sector facing declining demand, government-pays projects facing fiscal pressures resulting into in-ability to fund the project among other constraints. Covid-19 disruptions naturally should fall under force majeure clause, however most of my “learned friends” would argue that it’s debatable since actions by governments such as restricted movements, lockdowns and curfews are non natural occurrences. A ‘force majeure’ situation may imply the non-performance of a legal commitment due to abnormal and unforeseeable circumstances beyond the control of the party invoking it and whose consequences could not have been avoided in spite of the exercise of all due care. It allows the party invoking it not to perform its contractual obligations to the extent caused by the force majeure situation. However, the definition of force majeure may vary from one contract to another and the court’s interpretation. Force majeure clauses are interpreted by the courts using the general principles of contract law and administration. The intent of the parties, as expressed in the specific language of the contract, is paramount. Each contract must be interpreted in light of its specific contract language and the applicable case law in the governing jurisdiction. Kenya has over the years strengthened its PPP, legal and regulatory framework. Many force majeure clauses in procurement contracts are not clearly drafted, and they may possess ambiguity as to whether they apply to certain natural phenomenon or not. For instance, most leases have specifically carved out payment of rent and other monetary obligations from the obligations that may be excused or suspended. The World Bank group advice that it’s prudent to review your contracts agreements immediately and understand what is covered and what is excluded in each contract. Some contracts do not include a force majeure clause at all. In situations where force majeure does apply, each party to a contract is required to make reasonable efforts to perform and to act reasonably to mitigate its damages. There is no universally applicable determination of when force majeure applies and when it does not. Covid-19 has taught us to read the fine prints in our contractual agreements and ensure force majeure clause is inserted in our contracts. Panya is Procurement and supply chain management consultant; Lecturer and Researcher, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology