President Uhuru Kenyatta addresses the nation from State House, Nairobi on March 12, 2021. The imposition of fresh restrictions to curb the spread of Covid-19, including cessation of movement in Nairobi and four surrounding counties, has raised certain legitimate concerns that must be addressed. Under the new restrictions announced last week by President Uhuru Kenyatta, Nairobi and the counties of Kajiado, Machakos, Kiambu and Nakuru would be treated as one zone, and people would be barred from crossing over to other areas. Bars and churches within the zone were also ordered shut. Although the measures make sense given the flare-up of coronavirus infections and deaths, their impact is likely to be negligible unless health safety protocols are enforced properly. It makes no sense locking down these counties yet their residents continue to recklessly flout rules such as social distancing or wearing of face masks. If the objective of this lockdown is to control Covid-19 infections and deaths, the State must change tack and begin focusing on individual behaviour because that is where the problem lies. We are better off enforcing the health safety regulations to tame the pandemic fastest possible than resorting to meaningless and endless blockades which only hurt businesses and livelihoods. Law enforcers have become a weak link in the fight against the coronavirus. The State must act or we risk sinking deeper into desperation. Simple actions such as patrolling city streets and estates to ensure adherence to health safety protocols can make a big difference in taming the spread of the virus and save us the socio-economic damage of endless blockades. The State should also consider regular crackdowns on passenger service vehicles whose operators violate health safety regulations. The risk of Covid-19 is likely to be with us for a long time and emphasis must turn to sustainable strategies such as behaviour change management, vaccination and enforcement of rules set by health authorities. A few counties such as Kisumu seem to be getting it right in the enforcement of face mask wearing and this should replicate countrywide. Citizens should also play their part to help end this pandemic fastest possible. Continued truancy only means prolonged suffering.