People and companies alike, the economic strain brought by Covid-19 continues to expose those who behave with honour and integrity because it’s how they are built, and those who think it’s OK at any opportunity to reduce their own problems by creating problems for anyone else they can get to part with money for nothing. My latest voyage of discovery being the behaviour of Air France. For today, I am set to lose tens of thousands of shillings on flights it cancelled, as I am stuck negotiating the complex barrage of obstacles it has used to prevent refunds. As it is, by European law, and by its stated conditions during Covid-19, I as a passenger (surprise) am not obliged to pay for a flight that never flies. Also, as it is, Air France does not want to refund me. So it has thought about this, a lot. It virtually cannot get flight bookings at the moment unless it agrees to change dates or refund on Covid-19 disruption — like a new rule saying you cannot enter the country, for instance. That renders flights null, and insurers aren’t interested in covering against Covid-19 disruption. So airlines either offer to change or refund your flight, or no one will book with them. So Air France does guarantee that. But having captured your purchase of a flight, it does not under any circumstances want to let your funds go just because the flight you paid for is cancelled by Air France, as several flights a week from Nairobi to Paris now have been. So first it sends out notifications telling you your flight is cancelled, but that it will follow up with information on replacement flights, vouchers or refunds. It then automatically books you onto flights for some other date, and lets you know. No permission. No confirmation from you. No clues on refunds now. But for the persistent, they can follow links to their bookings. The emails and the booking say because the flight was cancelled you are entitled to a refund. There is a button telling you how to claim your refund, which tells you to do it by modifying your booking online. But the modify booking button is deactivated and says you cannot modify your changed-without-your-permission booking. Oh now, so you can’t get a refund. Get it by modifying, but you cannot modify. Sweet. So now the only route is to call them — an international call. You get to the switchboard and they inform you of a long phone wait, because they are super busy because of Covid-19 — but actually not because of Covid-19, per se. But because they have closed off all the ‘modify booking’ pages on cancelled flights? So everyone who actually cannot fly on their Air France-chosen new flights is now forced into that one phone queue? After hours of waiting, and recorded messages to tell you for any refund fill out the general form on the website, I filled the general non-flight-related form. Now every type of tiny website can manage an email notification when a website form is submitted. Air France tells you that you will get an email confirming you have submitted the form — no email arrives. So does the form not work? Or did Air France not quite afford the web developer to generate an auto-response email to acknowledge receipt of a submitted generic refund form? Air France, I can help you with this, for just Sh3,000, let my Kenyan developer soar over the inadequacies and failures of your online system and autogenerate form confirmations, including what information was submitted in them. We’d be happy to help, I’ll even fund it for you. Meanwhile, my original flight I paid for that was cancelled was flying today, and, as of now, I have failed for two whole weeks to reach Air France in any way to get around their enforced and confirmed replaced flight bookings. So Air France wins, I lose. It runs no flight. I either fly when I cannot and do not want to, or it gets to keep all the money for the flight it cancelled. And that’s how it works by closing off ‘modify’, disabling the forms, and cancelling the flight anyway.