A farmer ploughs at Kaaboi in Turbo, Uasin Gishu County on January 28, 2021. FILE PHOTO | NMG The price of ploughing has gone up by 30 percent in the North Rift as tractor owners pass the cost of a sharp increase in price of diesel to farmers. Farmers will now have to part with Sh3,000 to plough an acre up from Sh2,300 previously after the price of diesel rose sharply with a litre retailing at Sh108.4 in Eldoret and Sh108.8 in Kitale up from Sh101 in corresponding period last year. Diesel prices have climbed by Sh5.75 a litre in the latest price review by the Energy and Petroleum Regulatory Authority (EPRA), increasing pressure on farmers and transporters already hit by the economic downturn due to the Coronavirus pandemic. “We have got no other alternative but to increase the cost in order to make a margin out of our business,” said Gibson Koech, a farmer in Cherangani, Trans-Nzoia County. The increase comes at a time when most of the farmers are about to carry out the second ploughing in preparation for planting season ahead of the onset of this year’s long rains, which the weatherman had said would start this week. Farmers want the government to provide subsidy for inputs to cushion them from high cost of production following a sharp rise in diesel prices this month. Director of the Kenya Farmers Association Kipkorir Menjo said the increase in cost of diesel at a time farmers are preparing for the next planting season will make it difficult for most of them. He said the move will see farmers scale down on acres under crop because of limited funds. “We want the government to cushion the vulnerable growers through subsidies on farm inputs to protect farmers from high cost of production,” said Mr Menjo. In the previous review, diesel recorded the biggest jump in the prices, going up by about Sh8. The government has been aiming at lowering the cost of production. The rise comes at a time when motorists were supposed to be protected by fuel subsidy starting July last year. However, Epra said that the regulations to manage the subsidy were not yet ready by the time it was set to be rolled out as a legal hitch denied them the subsidy. Under the subsidy scheme that excluded petrol and started in July last year, Kenyans were not expected to bear costs of diesel prices above $50 a barrel.