“One of the teachers insists that we take up role models to help us grow in academics but I struggle with that a lot because I like to be myself and not play copycat. I have tried to explain that to her before but she mistook me for being truant which hurts me so much. How can I make her get my point?” *** It seems that you and your teacher are speaking different languages and that this is the reason you do not seem to understand each other. Your teacher means well when he tells you that you should try to emulate a man or woman who in your opinion has achieved a measure of success, This will help you try to plan a career path that will take you to a place similar to where your hero has reached. If I understand your teacher, the instruction is about you identifying those features or characteristics you deem to define success and choosing a path similar to the one taken by your hero or role model! So, the choice of role model is yours and the extent to which you follow the path is yours. In this argument, you might even choose more than one model and also pick the pace and direction of the path and or destination. What you seem to be hearing from your teacher is that she or someone else will choose a role model and you will have to give up some bits of who you are to become a person that is not yourself in the process. Quite rightly you have become a rebel and have said that you know yourself, like yourself and have decided to become a person of your own choosing. In this sense, your reasoning is impeccable and to be admired. In this regard, it is not clear why your teacher would think of you as being a truant, because this word applies to a student who is away from school without a reason or permission. You are simply expressing an opinion different from your teacher which seems to be the right thing. Assuming that we are now on the right track in this question a number of issues arise, some very basic and others very complex indeed. For example, what is the definition of a successful person and what is the best route to success? Is one for example a success because they have finished university, got a job, married and now lives in a leafy suburb with spouse and three children? How does one define success? Bill Gates dropped out of Harvard in his second year and became a millionaire by the age of 26. Did he become a success because he dropped out of school or in spite of dropping out? There is no doubt that Microsoft is a successful company but what of the founder? Is he indeed a good role model and should you drop out of school to follow his footsteps? Mark Zuckerberg, of Facebook also dropped out of Harvard and did not complete his degree in psychology and computer science. What will your teacher tell you about such a person? A brilliant inventor or a school dropout who should not be emulated? As one grows up, there are often men and women who appear to have achieved a measure of success that is to be admired. One could for example decide to take his parents as the role models in his life and many people indeed aspire to be like their parents. If for example your parents relate to one another respectfully and if in addition they have made a home for you to grow up happily, it is possible to take them as the model for the type of family that you might want for yourself. It is also possible to admire and aspire to be like a neighbour who is a senior police officer who you admire because of the very smart uniform that he wears and the fact that other police officers salute him as he enters a car that then zooms off with a siren in full blast. Another student will admire a smart lawyer in court who speaks in court with confidence and clarity and the young student then decides to be like that lawyer. In my case, the decision to become a psychiatrist was driven by Franz Fanon, the psychiatrist from Martinique, who fought along Algerian freedom fighters and who authored the timeless book The wretched of the earth. I decided to be like him because he was to me at the age of 16, a person to be emulated. He was my role model.