Mr Andrew Kamau, Petroleum principal secretary. FILE PHOTO | NMG Petroleum Principal Secretary Andrew Kamau has been given three months to explain the botched implementation of a plan to supply the poor with cooking gas. Should he fail to provide the details, Mr Kamau faces a surcharge of Sh870 million in line with the Public Finance Management Act. According to the National Assembly’s Public Accounts Committee (PAC) that investigated the deal on the alert of the Auditor General, the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum had committed Sh870 million to the project by the time it was abandoned. According to the PAC, the contractors of the Mawananchi Gas Project that was to distribute four million six-kilo gas cylinders delivered cylinders whose valves were faulty. The taxpayers did not get value for money and it is even getting worse partly with the abandoned 109,000 cylinders rotting at the National Oil Corporation of Kenya stores since the distribution was halted in 2018. One, Sh870 million is not small budget and any programme involving that kind of expenditure should be water-tight, especially something whose gaps could lead to deaths like the use of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). Two, while the benefits of clean fuel are well-known, such programmes should be delivered with a rare precision to benefit the economy, especially on the health of taxpayers. Three, even before talking about the personal responsibility that the officer in charge will take, it is unacceptable that State programmes that are known to consume huge budgets can run on a possible auto pilot to the extent a whole Sh870 million without being clear on the outcomes. Four, and the most worrying is how suppliers are picked for State buying. The government is one of the biggest buyers and it has a labyrinth of procurement layers and laws, including the PFM Act. How such possible tight steps are navigated by unscrupulous traders with ease is mind-boggling. While punishments like a surcharge are expected in terms of possible indemnity, we urge public officials to take their work more seriously and stop exposing the government and taxpayers to this shameful rot every now and then. Someone must stop this tendering rot.