SRC chairperson Lyn Mengich gestures during a press briefing on May 15, 2019. PHOTO | FRANCIS NDERITU | NMG It is good to see the Salaries and Remuneration Commission (SRC) finally taking concrete steps to address the huge drain on the public purse caused by civil service allowances. It has long been an open secret that public servants have been abusing the allowances to bump up their pay in spite of promises by the Treasury to control these payments. For a country that is collecting just over Sh1.5 trillion in tax revenue, spending Sh800 billion on public sector wages is irresponsible, given that it leaves little for development expenditure that is necessary to grow the economy. Differentiating between the remunerative and facilitative allowances, as the SRC is doing in its latest effort to cut the public sector wage bill, is important. It protects the workers from losing essential pay like house, commuter and hardship allowances, which fall under the remunerative category, while cutting the much abused allowances such as per diem and entertainment. Even as we recognise that this is a positive step, we however feel that there is still more fat to cut from the public wage bill, given the oversized share of national revenue that goes towards salaries. Already, the SRC is taking steps to cap the allowances for new employees at 40 percent of gross pay. While this is meant to cushion current workers from taking a real pay cut on their payslips after the reduction of facilitative allowances, the SRC should do a further review of those allowances that are being retained, to ensure that only the very necessary ones survive the chop. Looking back 20 years ago, Kenyan public workers were on 31 different types of allowances. The allowances have sice ballooned to 247. This shows that there is a lot of room to cut these emoluments. For the allowance cuts to be effective, however, they must also be seen to be fair across the board. The SRC must therefore ensure that they cover the entire spectrum of the public sector, from top to bottom, without exempting some in high office from losing allowances.