Education Cabinet Secretary Prof George Magoha. FILE PHOTO | NMG For the more than 1.9 million Class Eight and Form Four learners across Kenya, this is a crucial week as far as sitting national examinations goes. Close to 1.2 million pupils will sit the Kenya Certificate of Primary Education (KCPE) examination from today while more than 700,000 Kenya Certificate of Secondary Education (KCSE) examination candidates start theirs on Friday. For the government, it is a do-or-die case considering the unending attempts by various people to cheat in the exams that the candidates, parents, teachers, schools, sponsors rely on to test how much they achieved from the eight-year and four-year educational investments. The Teachers Service Commission (TSC) has recalled education officers on leave and cancelled field trips to get the requisite numbers with the goal of delivering credible exams. It is noteworthy that the government, through the Ministry of Education, has promised that no candidate will miss the tests. While we wish the candidates the best of luck, we particularly ask the candidates and other stakeholders to look at the exams in terms of national importance. It should be clear to everyone involved that passing the exams is not a stand-alone event and none can survive in an economy alone because they got straight As in the tests. The government is taking the pains to secure the tests because the economy should grow. Parents and guardians are investing in education to give the country dependable talent that can come up with ideas and turn them into tangible programmes that deliver the much-needed jobs. So, every candidate ought to perceive the exams as an important step in the journey of building the nation. Anyone dreaming of cheating in the exams; a government official thinking they can favour anyone; and, any teacher thinking this is the time to show ‘love’ by sitting the papers on behalf of the learners should be told No. They should be arrested, charged in court and barred from handling learners again in their professional lives. Sitting the exams as per the rules and without hitches is a service to the nation and should worry the whole country. Let none sleep on the job of delivering believable KCPE and KCSE examinations.