Sam Wanjohi, founder Popote Innovations. PHOTO | POOL In 2008 Sam Wanjohi founded Foresight Interiors, a venture that was involved in designing kitchens and making wardrobes as well as an assortment of furniture. Mr Wanjohi, however, says running the enterprise presented challenges in dealing with expenditures. “I was really passionate about design and building. But as the company grew, I stopped enjoying what I was doing,” Mr Wanjohi says. ‘’I realised that although I was generating revenue, my lack of control and visibility on expenditure was killing my business. I discovered that this was the biggest reason for businesses failing in Kenya.” The challenges pushed the entrepreneur to start a firm known as Popote Innovations. The tech firm operates a platform, Popote Pay, that allows businesses to make day-to-day payments from petty cash, supplies, utilities, wages, payroll and taxes, digitally. ‘’While at the interior business, I always had to be present to sign a cheque as the administrator, and be on top in book keeping and accounting. I needed a way to do this fast and remotely,” he adds. Popote Pay is a web- and mobile-based application which enables businesses to make 100 percent of their payments digitally, from Sh10 to Sh10 million per transaction. Payments are delivered instantly whether to mobile number, buy goods, paybill or bank account, and thereafter records saved with notes, attachments and in their general ledger accounting category. “With it employees can initiate payments, and the employer can review and approve easily, whether they are at the business premises or not,” Mr Wanjohi says. “So apart from digitising the whole payment process, the accounting is also done at the point of payment rather than afterwards.” This, he notes, reduces a lot of workload in data entry, while eliminating mistakes. The platform also supports distributed spending allowing businesses to grant a limit per transaction and per week, for instance in incidentals like transport, fuel, lunch with real-time visibility. This is regarded as much safer than giving cash allowances and faster than processing expense reimbursements. “The extra few seconds taken on each payment saves hours a week of tedious reconciliation and accounting data entry that conventional payment methods cause,” says the techpreneur. Popote Pay that was first targeting sole-proprietors and SMEs, was launched in the market in July 2019. The platform was started with a Sh100 million capital from individual investors and a loan from development finance institution (DFI). Mr Wanjohi, who has a master’s in engineering and project management, says companies may increase income but make huge losses when it comes to expenses, due to cost inflation in procurement, collusion with suppliers to inflate invoice, theft from petty cash or fictitious payouts. “Since a business has so many daily outgoing payments, it is impossible for the owner to make sure every pay-out is accurate,” he tells Digital Business “When paying by conventional methods of cash, cheques mobile money and bank transfers, it becomes even more difficult to reconcile and account for all them all.’’ This fragmented approach to payments, he says, “mothballs into a situation where the business is not profitable and many eventually collapse.” The high rate of failure of businesses has been largely due to poor expenditure management or internal funds misappropriation. However, over 90 percent of expenses in both formal and informal businesses are still paid in cash and cheques, despite the risks and delays. This old-fashioned way, Mr Wanjohi says, wastes time, risks fraud, destroys productivity and suppresses growth. The company is now expanding its services to NGOs, corporates and institutions. Popote Innovations recently received funding from GreenHouse Capital, an African fintech investment company, . The firm plans to raise its capacity to be able to handle budgeting, record keeping and accounting digitally. “We aim to expand into other markets with a proven and advanced product offering designed to plug into any country’s existing digital payment rails. In many countries, these rails will be provided by the banking sector,” he says. The solution fits in a space that has seen increased digital payments channels, but Mr Wanjohi says the innovation serves as a layer for expense management and accounting, “while collaborating with players in different verticals”. Even so, he remains optimistic that businesses will find the service beneficial particularly because it is cheaper than conventional methods. ‘’If you want to run a successful business with the least amount of headaches, you need to embrace technology in many areas,” Mr Wanjohi adds.