Safari Sounds Band (from left) Juma Mzingo Kidasi, John Izungu and Gabriel Kazungu in Mombasa. PHOTO | KEVIN ODIT | NMG Their blend of coastal cultural music with jazz and disco endeared them to many music lovers catapulting them into the global arena. Founded in 1976, Safari Sound Band has stood the test of time, from its humble beginnings in Mombasa, it has ruled airwaves with its many hit songs among them ‘Coconut’, ‘Lala Salama’, ‘Kilimanjaro’, Welcome Home and ‘Nakupenda.’ The band is among the few in the country, to have had their 1983 album ‘Best of African Songs’ awarded gold, platinum and silver certification. According to the band leader Juma Mzingo, six months after its formation, they began by playing popular cover versions of the time at various hotels in Coast. “We used to play in various establishments among them African Safari Club which owned several hotels at the time and were always filled with foreign tourists. That is where we promoted Kenyan music,” says Mzingo. Mzingo who plays bass guitar and also sings says that in 1983, they launched their first album “Best of African Songs” which was well received. It also featured four East African artistes. For the last 45 years, they have visited several European, Middle East and African countries such as Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Sweden, Dubai, Oman and South Africa, countries where their music was popular. “During our performances, the shows were always sold out, people came out in large numbers because they loved our songs,” says Mzingo. Mzingo and John Izungu are the only founding members still with the band with others such as Swaleh Mbarak, Mahmoud Siraj and Dala Khamis having left while Richard Chuli died. Izungu who still composes songs for the band attributes their success to the fact that they are not only singers but entertainers. “We managed to transform the traditional Taarab into a disco kind of music to combine modernity and culture,” says Izungu. Izungu who also plays saxophone says that one of their undoings as a band was a failure to record the songs which were taken over by ‘rival’ bands who recorded the songs ahead of them. Due to their ever-busy schedule at the time, finding time to record their music was not easy hence some took advantage of that and recorded their songs. Their last recorded album ‘Mambo Jambo’ was released in 1994 and also featured a Zambian artist. Currently, apart from Mzingo and Izungu, other members are Zillia Juma who is the daughter of Mzingo (vocals), Ali Matata (vocals), Gabriel Kazungu (lead guitar),Athman ‘Bajay’ (keyboard) and Mwambogha Mchili (drums). Zillia says that as youthful members of the band, they always aspire to add something new. “We have learnt a lot from them (senior band members), ” says Zillia, the only lady in the band. Despite their music successes, Mzingo says income has not been much especially in recent times. Mzingo says in the 80’s and early 90’s, there ‘was good money’ during their whirlwind tours across Europe and other parts of the world. He says that some music publishers take advantage of artistes and steal their royalties. “Unless systems change, even the current musicians will suffer the same fate,” says Mzingo. He adds that some people have also been selling their music. Izungu gives an example of their song ‘Coconut’ which he says was well-received outside the country but never got a share of the royalties. “There was a time we were performing at a hotel, a man who dealt with musicians came and gave us a tidy sum of money saying our music was well appreciated, how much do you think did they made from our music?”, says Izungu. Mzingo says he looks forward to steering the band to greater heights. “Most clubs are not taking in bands now because of Covid, we plan to venture online,” adds Zilllia. pmuyanga@ke.nationmedia.com