Wheat flour on the shelves at a supermarket in Nairobi. PHOTO | DENNIS ONSONGO | NMG Wheat imports to Kenya declined by 34 per cent in January as the high cost of the commodity due to imposition of export tax by Russia impacted on the quantities shipped into the country. Data from the Ministry of Agriculture indicates that wheat imports dropped from 1.9 million bags in December last year to 1.28 million bags in January 2021. The decline implies that Kenyans will have to contend with higher cost of wheat flour as the country relies on imports to bridge its annual production deficit. Most of the wheat consumed in Kenya is imported from Argentina, US, Ukraine and Russia. “From September 2020, Kenya has experienced reduced imports of wheat compared to same period in 2019. This is mostly attributed to reduced global supplies, especially from Russia and Ukraine, with the governments encouraged their own domestic consumption as part of Covid-19 pandemic social protection,” said the ministry. “In this move, Russia imposed higher export duties thus leading to high imports costs for most wheat,” added the report from the ministry. Russia introduced a 25 euro (Sh3,225) duty per tonne of export wheat to discourage shipping out of the commodity as it protects its local market. The new Russian tax added pressure on the already high cost of wheat that has seen the price of flour rise in recent weeks. According to Russian agriculture consultancy firm SovEcon, the planned wheat tax could cut Russia’s overseas sales by about three million tonnes. The potential fall in exports from the world’s leading wheat exporter will likely see the global price of the commodity continue on an upward trend. The cost of a tonne of wheat has increased by 30 per cent to Sh33,000 from Sh25,300 a year ago, sparking a rally both on bakers and standard flour. Kenya is a net importer of wheat, bringing in two-thirds of its requirement to meet the annual consumption of 900,000 tonnes against the annual production of 350,000 tonnes.