Blue pills as Viagra is commonly referred to have lately gained popularity due to misuse. This has led to serious consequences and death of many men suffering from erectile dysfunction or weak erections. Blue pills are performance enhancement drugs prescribed by doctors after a clinical examination of the patient to ascertain his ability to handle the drugs. Normally, the power of an erection (intensity or hardness ) decreases as one gets older. However, men who suffer from weak erections refuse to come to terms with this fact and want to be as erect as they were in their 20s and 30s. Most men experiencing weak erections panic and seek easy solutions, most of which end in pharmacies. Here are some questions that men present with in my clinic. Do I qualify to use blue pills? Not all patients with erectile problems are allowed to use blue pills. An erectile dysfunction could be a symptom of chronic disease— mostly cardiovascular, kidney or neurological disease, diabetes, or psychological stress. If you suffer from these conditions, you can experience erectile dysfunction at some point. To qualify for use of blue pills, you must fulfil clinical criteria. I suffer from erectile dysfunction and I would like to start using blue pills, how do I proceed? You first have to be examined by a urology doctor. The doctor will evaluate your health and advice on suitable blue pills. The pills given depend on your health and the cause of the erectile dysfunction. What evaluation do I need to undergo to use blue pills? Patient evaluation and their suitability to use blue pills are classified depending on their cardiac risk. · First, you should not have an underlying health condition that could be worsened by the drugs. · Second, you have to be evaluated by a heart specialist to ascertain if you have had any cardiac or hypertensive problems. · You should not have a history of heart disease. After evaluation by a heart specialist, the evaluation results will be sent to a urologist to determine if you qualify to use blue pills or not — and which type is suitable. What treatment options and processes do I need to undergo before using these pills? The use of blue pills is a step-by-step process. The first step is that you have to manage your weight by exercising, eating healthy foods, and practice Kegel exercises. Once your weight is managed, you will have to undergo a cardiovascular risk assessment (if needed). If your heart condition is okay, a doctor will then start you on oral blue pills. For most men who have trouble keeping an erection firm enough for sexual intercourse, these medications work well and cause few side effects. If the oral blue pills do not respond, we’ll examine you further using a procedure that involves injecting a drug to your penis to induce an erection, if there is a response you will continue with this line of treatment. If you don’t respond to the injection, we’ll put a penile prosthesis. This is a surgery done to insert a prosthesis inside the penis. These implants are either malleable (bendable) or inflatable. The simplest type of prosthesis has a pair of bendable rods surgically implanted within the erection chambers of the penis. With this type of implant, the penis is always semi-rigid and merely needs to be lifted or adjusted into the erect position to initiate sex. It gives satisfaction to you and your partner more than 95 percent. What side effects am I likely to get while using blue pills? Most men who take oral medications having undergone medical evaluation are not bothered by side effects because their health condition can handle the drugs. However, mild side effects that may occur include headaches, flushing, blurred vision which clears with time, and back pain. · If you use these pills without a doctor’s evaluation of your heart and general health, you are likely to suffer a heart attack, a common occurrence of late. · In rare situations, you can experience hearing loss or vision loss. If you’re taking any oral erectile dysfunction medication and have a sudden loss of hearing or vision, seek prompt medical attention. · Blue pills can also cause an erection that doesn’t go away on its own. Though rare, it can be painful and requires medical treatment to avoid damage to your penis. If you have an erection that lasts more than four hours, seek immediate medical attention. Generally, blue pills are prescribed medication that should only be used under doctors’ advice and not purchased over the counter. Dr Yousef is a consultant urologist at Aga Khan University Hospital, Nairobi