Kenya was the hardest hit with the locust invasion in 2020 compared with her East African counterparts. FILE PHOTO | NMG Every year, climate change results in a socio-economic loss of 3-5 per cent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). In 2019, the World Bank reported our GDP was $95.5 billion. It means that, not including the money siphoned through corruption and other means, we lost between $2.9 billion to 4.8 billion (Sh300 to Sh500 billion) from the socio-economic losses emanating just from climate change. Granted, as a country, we have come a long way in fighting the climate crisis. Not too long ago, the environmental concerns were considered non-issues where infrastructural projects were concerned, and the government had its way in projects it conceived; the environment be damned! So, to that end, we’ve made some progress. Kenya recently submitted its Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) for the period of 2020-2030, which commits to cut our carbon emissions by 3 percent by 2030 relative to the Business As Usual (BAU) scenario of 142 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2eq). These commitments are because the government understands we are experiencing climate change in the form of droughts, famines, floods, locust invasion, and heatwaves. In one way or the other, these have caused food insecurity, disease outbreaks, internally displaced people, aggravating conflict due to natural resources, and even premature loss of lives. Therefore, with this understanding, it is sad to see the country’s leadership interested in exchanging insults and witch-hunting each other when we have an enormous problem in the name of climate change that has crystallised into frequent and consistent extreme weather events for the past decade. Besides these experiences we’ve had demonstrating climate change, there is a myriad of reasons that causes the climate crisis, including natural causes and human causes. Without bogging you with too many details, climate change has three leading natural causes: volcanic activity, solar output, and orbital changes. The unnatural causes, on the other hand, include land-use change – exacerbating deforestation from 16 percent total tree cover to just two percent and greenhouse gas emissions from industries (e.g., plastic), transport, agriculture, and energy (mostly fossil fuel) causing headaches to scientists in tackling climate change. There are several aspects to consider to adapt and mitigate climate impacts, including financing the costs, technology development and transfer, governance, land use, and land use planning. For the country to adapt and mitigate climate change, the cost to implement the requisite adaptation and mitigation actions to get to the 2030 target is $62 billion. The country will need international support for 87 percent of the costs (about $54 billion). And considering we’re already haemorrhaging between Sh300 billion and Sh500 billion annually due to climate change’s socio-economic losses; we seem not to give this subject matter the seriousness it deserves. What’s worse is that our elected leaders seem not to care enough about the looming climate crisis. And this explains the lack of enthusiasm in passing climate change laws at the county level - only a handful of counties have passed these laws when only about 16 percent of the country is arable land supporting over 80 percent of the population while over 84 percent remains arid and semi-arid land. While we have seen other governments in the West, e.g., the United States, having climate change as a pillar of their campaign and getting elected because of it, Kenyans treat climate change as a non-issue. Both the electorate and candidates. No wonder environmental regulatory institutions that should push for climate change mitigation approve projects like coal power plants like the one proposed in Lamu, which will single-handedly increase our carbon footprint by 6-10 per cent. Hitherto, no party or politician has featured climate change in their campaign manifestos. Even when in 2018 droughts and floods resulted in the loss of human lives, more than 230,000 people - 150,000 being children were displaced, over 700 schools had to be closed, billions of shillings worth of infrastructure and roads destroyed, 8,500 hectares of crops annihilated, and over 20,000 heads of cattle drowned. Since our economy is dependent on climate-sensitive sectors, including tourism, rain-fed agriculture, health, water, wildlife, and energy - their vulnerability is increased by climate change. Therefore, we need to shift from business as usual of reallocating resources that could have gone to development to address climate emergencies and come up with sound climate solutions.