A customer buys maize from Uganda at a market near the Busia border. FILE PHOTO | NMG Last week I attended a function presided over by Agriculture Cabinet Secretary Peter Munya, where the central subject was the new regulations to compel potato farmers and traders to package the tubers in standard 50kg bags instead of packages as heavy as 160 kilos which obviously exploit farmers while damaging health of human lifters. My interest in the ministerial function was the presentation to the CS of two reports by the National Steering Committee on Revival of Pyrethrum and Cotton which I had the honour of chairing over the last six months. Although I am usually domiciled in the energy sector, I am also an active farmer keen on value additions in agriculture.. During the function, there was also talk of maize imports from neighbouring countries which had been temporarily restricted due to excessive aflatoxin from insufficient grain drying. That Kenya routinely struggles to meet its maize requirements from imports, while we have significant potential for supplies of other staple foods like potatoes, bananas, rice, millets, and cassava is a contradiction that should invite a serious conversation. How can we alter Kenyans eating habits to accommodate other staples and reduce overreliance on ugali?. How can we commercialise the other staples into products and supply chains that are convenient for food market distributors and kitchens, the way maize meal supply chains are organised and promoted? I am aware that maize meal is the staple of choice for many heavy-duty workers by virtue of its immense energy content. However, as the population grows, we must rebalance our food resources and feeding habits to specifically reduce overdependence on maize imports. Kenya cannot implement a sustainable national food security strategy based on food imports. As much as 50 percent of animal feeds inputs for our fast-growing livestock sector (dairy, pork, poultry etc.) are maize products, which means the ugali demands are continuously competing with animal feeds demands. Livestock outputs are critical for meeting Kenya’s protein requirements. It is therefore important to balance maize demands for ugali and for animal feeds, a continuing headache for millers. I have no issue with Kenyans eating as much ugali as they require if maize is not sourced from routine imports. A lot of acreage of good land in Kenya is already dedicated to maize, yet we continue to import maize from our neighbours who produce maize more cheaply. I believe this is mainly due to insufficient application of modern seed technologies and crop husbandry, resulting in low maize yields, and high unit production costs, making Kenyan maize difficult to compete with regional imports. If we improve maize crop outputs and unit costs per acre, we can significantly reduce imports while leaving spare land to grow other critical crops. Most of the lands under maize cultivation are suitable for growing oil seed crops (soya beans and sunflower) which are today all imported to meet requirements for cooking oil, and protein content for animal feeds. It will be a great day when we see fractions of fields currently under maize production converted into oil seed production, a critical food security component. Indeed, with improved farming methods and efficient crop marketing, we can sustainably grow both maize and oil seeds and avoid imports of both. Further, we should not visualize maize simply in terms of Ugali, for indeed maize can be industrialized to produce many other products as we once did in a factory in Eldoret where starch, glucose, syrup, and yeast were commercially produced. Surplus maize can also be used to make alcohol. Yes opportunities and possibilities for maize are numerous. In the meantime, let us reduce pressure on the maize demands by diversifying our culinary preferences to significantly include other staple substitutes. This we do as we concurrently improve our maize crop productivity. The success factor should be defined by how we meet our national food security with minimum or no imports. In Kenya, maize is a peculiar and enigmatic commodity. It fills media columns. It feeds politics. It harbors vested interests of all shades . It is usually a load of pain and tears for farmers. In kitchens it is a quick fix ugali meal. Yes. maize as a subject can accommodate a full scholarship thesis.