Ever switched jobs to go work in a new industry and it took you forever to learn the niche lingo? Did such an experience make you feel excluded like an outsider? Conversely, ever worked within an ecosphere that saw itself as superior to others outside that industry? If so, then you fell into a network structure gap with communication and identity holes. Ron Burt and Giuseppe Soda’s just published study highlights, in part, how professionals can profit from brokering between groups. Humans tend to cluster into cliques, factions, and units because of needed collaboration to accomplish tasks. Intragroup interactions become more frequent and important than communications outside the group. People within these groups desire efficiency instead of constantly explaining their ideas from scratch, so they come up with terminology and theories to support quicker and easier common communication. Thereafter, people within the group use and share the newly created similar terms, communications, understandings, and actions. Inasmuch, they continue to invent and build upon the foundation with frameworks, acronyms, acceptable communication styles, signs, slides, and protocols that eventually become unifying features of the work group. Then those within the category become insiders as “ingroup” and start feeling a special sense of belonging and identity to the group. Groups could be specialised professional departments within a large company, a cohesive team as employees within a small firm, those within an industry or sector, people located in a special geography, individuals at a certain rank in a company or ministry, etc. Eric von Hippel notes that people in such groups become difficult to understand by outsiders and serious gaps start to appear in intergroup communication, flows of information, and empathy. The communication difficulties can create additional problems such as judgmental attitudes against outgroup people. Even conferences meant to bring various groups together leads to clustering of the already existing groups during breaks, meals, and activities that accentuate the differences in the minds of outgroup members. A lack of sincere cross-group (intergroup) communication and understanding emerges. An example persists in the NGO sector which utilises mountains of acronyms. Someone entering the NGO space from, as an example, the banking sector can feel overwhelmed and left out. Therefore, observers do not note many professionals jumping back and forth across the elusively yet still perforated barrier in and out of the sector despite the transference of many similar strategic, writing, management, and accountability skills. Another example of extreme ingroup versus outgroup mentality within networks involves the tussle between academia versus industry. Academia holds intense ingroup uniformity famously exclusionary to outsiders. Business professionals often face extreme uphill battles to enter the ranks of academia even if they possess doctoral degrees and would make exceptional teachers. Academia, in particular, developed over many decades alternative scientific terms to explain and discuss business happenings. The term funnel method subsides as just one example. The funnel method means something very different to an academic researcher than it does to an entrepreneur. Many businessmen and businesswomen, in turn, cannot understand the academic lingo pertaining to their own industries without receiving an abbreviated explanation. The holes between academia and industry yield a disconnect whereby academia understands well-researched solutions to typical business and management problems, but business leaders persist wholly unaware of such solutions. Academic research proves that performance reviews are harmful for employee performance, 360 degree evaluations are more of a popularity contest and settling scores against organisational enemies. Cash bonuses often backfire and cause worse employee performance, many key performance indicators can cause lower staff performance, managers spending time talking with their subordinates and getting to know them increases employees’ desire to quit a company in the East and Southern African context, among hundreds of other powerful research findings. But business leaders usually do not know about the studies and continue operating in the same way still insisting on annual destructive performance reviews, useless obsession with key performance indicators and so on. On the flip side, academics often survive painfully unaware of the depths of their disconnect with business and industry. These ivory tower academics might not even know that they are out of touch. Many executives notice that when hired as consultants, academic faculty often provide verbose confused reports not useful to the firm. Surprisingly, usually academics’ own performance measurements within universities do not meaningfully value or weight connections with practitioners in their own fields of studies. In continuation, East Africa academia, as a whole but with unique exceptions, stands as its own unique group that exists extremely different and outside of international ‘elite’ academia which is tightly cohesive through conferences, rankings, ratings, strict quantitative and qualitative research standards, promotion criteria, etc. Feel discouraged about the above gaps and holes? Do not worry. Turn the chasm between sectors, departments, and groups into an opportunity to enhance own relevance and earning power. Individuals who can intentionally look for and notice network holes become network node brokers who can function in and link either of two or more groups. They serve as a communication and strategic liaison between different worlds. When you act as the broker, you simultaneously increase the efficiency and performance of your own organisation in addition to your own personal benefits. Look around your own networks and broker linkages. Dr Scott may be reached on scott@ScottProfessor.com or on Twitter: @ScottProfessor