An attendant at a Total Petrol Station in Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG Petroleum Principal Secretary Andrew Kamau unflinchingly asserted that Kenyans should brace themselves for more pain at the pump in the wake of the recent increase in fuel prices. The global oil producers under the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec) “don’t care about Kenyans” so they will set prices that takes care of their interests, he says. High oil prices greatly concern consuming countries. No wonder that Opec’s every move is closely watched by investors, traders, policymakers, governments, and consumers. In your budget, fuel is an expense that cannot miss. You factor it whether you prepare your budget on a weekly or monthly basis. Indications are that we will continue to experience fuel surges which reflect steep inflation at various touchpoints. Quick flashback. When Covid-19 struck, economic activity worldwide slowed sharply starting January 2020. Demand for petroleum and petroleum products plummeted. A price war that broke out between Saudi Arabia and Russia did not make matters easier. As uncertainty reigned and the tussle persisted, demand reduced. Meanwhile, there was an unexpected supply increase, which led to a collapse in crude oil prices and subsequent impact on prices for refined petroleum products, among others. As 2021 progresses the crude oil prices and subsequent spikes in local fuel prices globally suggest that rates will climb consistently as we get further into the year. The differences in prices across countries are due to the various taxes and subsidies for fuel. Locally, prices at the pump have reached their highest level in 11 years. What is propping up the price of fuel in Kenya? Just like the rest of the world, Kenya has access to the same petroleum prices of international markets. Countries then decide to impose different taxes. As a result, the retail price of petrol is different. Kenya, it appears, went on a spree, introducing a series of taxes. Counting them, they are nearly 10, including the railway development levy, merchant shipping levy, petroleum regulatory levy, petroleum development levy, road maintenance levy, excise duty, import declaration fee and value added tax. These taxes form a strong component of our pricing formula, which has sparked outrage among Kenyans. For every Sh100 you pay for a litre of petrol, more than Sh57 goes to the government. There is an overarching sense of uncertainty towards the country’s finances, especially with a huge chunk of revenues generated earmarked for offsetting the loans running into trillions of shillings. The repercussions are being felt throughout all sectors, impacting heavily the price of basic commodities, transport, electricity and others. Last month, in India, the Congress chief spokesperson Randeep Surjewala was so incensed by the high taxes imposed on petrol and diesel that he termed the government a "curse" for the people. In Kenya, opposition Orange Democratic Movement (ODM) party reacting to the announcement of the lates fuel prices by the Energy and Petroleum Regulatory Authority (Epra) said in a statement: “Silence on our part at this time will amount to complicity, and we therefore unequivocally state that we are opposed to this increase in the price of fuel.” The Central Organisation of Trade Unions (Cotu) weighed in, asking the President to rein in Epra. The emerging narrative was that Epra had been unilaterally raising fuel prices — this time round to a nine-month high and the highest, the past 11 years. Aren’t these leaders and institutions the source of our tribulations? Aren’t they complicit? They are shouting the loudest, as they always do, yet they conspired to raise taxes in 2018. They passed the legislation that increased VAT on fuel to 16 percent and introduced the petroleum development levy, increasing fuel prices by a further Sh5. They also supported the rolling back of the Covid-19 tax relief measures announced by the President immediately after the pandemic struck. A majority of Kenyans are reeling from the ravages of the pandemic. Small businesses will close. The cost of doing business will be prohibitive. The gains made will be washed away. The State appears unperturbed and still wants more from the downtrodden. It calls for a remedy to slow or stop the bleeding. The fuel subsidy, which now runs into billions of shillings and was meant to cushion Kenyans from high pump prices since 2020, is not of any help. We are still being told to wait until the framework is put in place. Our pricing formula should be reviewed. The price elements that we have control over, mostly, domestic should be seriously examined to protect consumers. The Kenya Civil Society on Platform on Oil and Gas (KCSPOG) avers that ‘the pricing formula in its current format has maintained an almost predictable stream of revenue for government and oil marketing companies but not done well to protect the consumers.” A study done by the London-based UHY, a global accounting, tax and consultancy network, found some major economies had taxes making up significantly lower proportions of the cost of petrol. The study cites Canada and Japan, whose taxes make up 35 percent and 42 percent of the cost of petrol, respectively. Kenya has surpassed the global average, which is at 50 percent. The study surmises that there is needed to strike a balance to ensure fuel and tax costs are not prohibitive, especially to the retail and distribution sectors. The draft petroleum regulations, currently undergoing public scrutiny, should explicitly show how the subsidy would take effect to reduce the transfer of fluctuations in global prices to the end consumer. Everything must be done to offset the inflationary impact of high fuel prices. Parliament should urgently revisit these punitive fuel taxes; remove them and stop the blame game. Mr Mudibo is a strategic communications consultant