Isaiah Malunga’s ‘Three Musketeers’ which was showcased at Manjano 2020, in Village Market, Nairobi. PHOTO | POOL The annual art exhibition, Manjano 2021, will be held online in light of the Covid-19 safety regulations, giving artists an opportunity to showcase their talent to more art lovers. A week ago, behind closed doors at The GoDown Art Centre’s new location in Nairobi’s Kilimani, the final artworks selection process shifted into top gear. The three judges, whose identities remain anonymous until the opening on Saturday, got to see all the artworks of 142 artists who submitted a maximum of two items each, be it paintings or sculptures, installations, or videos. The winning artists will receive cash prizes, but the amount will be lower this year. “Unfortunately, due to Covid-19, we have had to cut back on the awards by half this year,” says Priscah Wairimu, Manjano’s programme manager. “We thought that this news might dampen artists’ desire to get involved with Manjano this year, but it didn’t.” This year, more established artists have submitted their works than students. “We thought this might be due to so many schools being closed so the word didn’t go around as widely among the youth as in years past,” said Priscah, adding that they “never know how many artworks will be in the judges’ final selection. It could be seven or 170.” Onyis Martin’s ‘State of the Union’ artwork that was showcased at Manjano 2020 at Nairobi’s Village Market. PHOTO | POOL Only six winners will receive cash prizes: three in the established artists’ category and three in the students. But rather than the older artists receiving Sh300,000, Sh150,000, and Sh75,000 respectively, they will get half those amounts. The first prize will get Sh150,000, the first runner-up will get Sh75,000, and the second runner-up will get Sh37,500. And the prizes being awarded in the students’ category will also be reduced. The first prize winner will receive Sh25,000, the first runner-up will get Sh15,000 and the second runner-up will get Sh7,500. Artists who will participate in this year’s Manjano exhibition are likely to receive a wider, global exposure than those who have been involved in the past as the event will be streamed online via GoDown’s Facebook page. “There will be live streaming on March 20 when the winners will be announced,”says Priscah. “There will also be advanced filming of all the artworks in the exhibition,” she adds. Last year’s art exhibition was held on the top floor of Nairobi’s Village Market shortly before the coronavirus hit the international news. The show had to shut down before it was officially meant to. Nonetheless, art lovers were able to see Onyis Martin’s ‘Car’ that won first prize in the established artist’s category.