The High Court has struck out a petition filed by a pastoral community in Ijara Garissa county challenging government’s plan to expand an animal conservancy that hosts the endangered Hirola antelope and white giraffe. Justice James Makau ruled that the court has no authourity to address the issues raised by two community representatives Abdulahi Ali and Adbikadir Shurie in their opposition to the project. While describing the entire petition to be null and incurably incompetent, the judge said the matter ought to have been filed at the Environment and Lands Court. “Article 165 (5) (b) of the Constitution precludes High Court from entertaining this Petition. I therefore find the proper court that should hear and determine this petition is the Environment and Lands Court and not High Court,” said justice Makau. He was ruling on an objection raised by the Ministry of Lands, the Attorney General and Garissa county government questioning the court’s jurisdiction to hear and determine the petition. The three objectors said the petitioners’ claim is “a non-starter and bad in law” as the issues raised are largely pertaining an alleged community land located in Garissa. As a result, they told justice Makau that the issues ought to be raised before the Environment and Lands Court in Garissa. In the case, the petitioners wanted court to stop the Ministry of Lands from allowing the Northern Rangeland Trust organization to take over a community land to expand the Ishaqbini Hirola Community Conservancy. The pastoral community that lives in Hara, Korisa and Kotile locations of Masalai ward in Ijara is claiming that the government has failed to protect their land from acquisition for private use under “false pretence” of ecosystem conservation. It wanted to be compensated for the land acquisition as well for the death of two rare white giraffes at the conservancy. Jospeh Wangui jwangui@ke.nationmedia.com  The High Court has struck out a petition filed by a pastoral community in Ijara Garissa county challenging government’s plan to expand an animal conservancy that hosts the endangered Hirola antelope and white giraffe. Justice James Makau ruled that the court has no authourity to address the issues raised by two community representatives Abdulahi Ali and Adbikadir Shurie in their opposition to the project. While describing the entire petition to be null and incurably incompetent, the judge said the matter ought to have been filed at the Environment and Lands Court. “Article 165 (5) (b) of the Constitution precludes High Court from entertaining this Petition. I therefore find the proper court that should hear and determine this petition is the Environment and Lands Court and not High Court,” said justice Makau. He was ruling on an objection raised by the Ministry of Lands, the Attorney General and Garissa county government questioning the court’s jurisdiction to hear and determine the petition. The three objectors said the petitioners’ claim is “a non-starter and bad in law” as the issues raised are largely pertaining an alleged community land located in Garissa. As a result, they told justice Makau that the issues ought to be raised before the Environment and Lands Court in Garissa. In the case, the petitioners wanted court to stop the Ministry of Lands from allowing the Northern Rangeland Trust organization to take over a community land to expand the Ishaqbini Hirola Community Conservancy. The pastoral community that lives in Hara, Korisa and Kotile locations of Masalai ward in Ijara is claiming that the government has failed to protect their land from acquisition for private use under “false pretence” of ecosystem conservation. It wanted to be compensated for the land acquisition as well for the death of two rare white giraffes at the conservancy.