A man herds his camels. FILE PHOTO | NMG Even before the onset of this year’s long rains, the deadly Rift Valley Fever (RVF) is proving a menace in two pastoral counties of Isiolo and Marsabit where an outbreak has been reported. Outbreaks of the disease in Africa are associated with periods of above-average rainfall, according to the World Health Organisation (WHO). The projected heavy rains starting this month, present an additional danger amid fear that it could escalate outbreaks of the disease caused by a virus that infects both animals and humans and eventually results in death. The highly infectious disease is transmitted to humans by mosquitoes or close contact with contaminated animals’ blood or organs, according to the WHO. With no specific treatment or effective human vaccine, Rift Valley fever can cause blindness and severe haemorrhaging, leading the victim to vomit blood or even bleed to death. During the last major outbreak of RVF in Kenya between November 2006 and March 2007, more than 234 people died and hundreds were hospitalised in the north eastern part of the country. This came with massive economic costs due to animal deaths, vaccinations as well as bans on livestock trade. This year, cases of RVR have been reported in several parts of the country, raising concern ahead of the March-April-May rains. While in Isiolo and Mandera counties RVF has been reported in humans, animals have also contracted the disease in Murang’a and Garissa. “As of February 4,2021, there were a total of 32 human cases (14 confirmed positive), and 11 deaths (CFR 34 per cent),” WHO said in its latest warning. “In December 2020, results from central veterinary laboratory (CVL) in Kabete taken from 120 livestock revealed 20 (19 sheep out of which 10 died, and 1 camel) were positive for RVF cases. Further laboratory analysis is ongoing in both human and livestock samples.” Since Garissa and Isiolo are pastoral communities, WHO forecasts the disease could spread to neighbouring counties and countries, leading to heavy losses for the pastoral communities already hit invasions by desert locusts.  HOW DID THE FIRST CASE EMERGE? In November last year, Isiolo reported its first case through herders’ deaths with fever, headache, and abdominal pain/diarrhoea-like symptoms at the County’s Department of Health. “The first human case was reported in late November 2020 from Sericho ward in Garbatulla Sub County. Deaths have been reported in Gafarsa and Erisaboru within Garbatulla Sub County as well Korbesa in Merti Sub County,” the WHO said. The following month, RVF was detected by the Kenya Medical Research Institute (Kemri). However, it took until January 7, when it was officially confirmed. On January 15-the country reported the case to the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE). A few days later, a patient from Kalmalab village in Mandera North Sub County was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) amid multiple organ failure after slaughtering four-camels on January 18. “Kalmalab village borders River Dawa, which broke its banks following rains in the Ethiopian highlands. The RVF outbreak may be associated with this flooding, as it increases the risk of mosquito-borne zoonosis. Livestock samples have been submitted to CVL Kabete for testing,” WHO added. Discovery of RVF in Isiolo saw surveillance ramped-up in the neighbouring counties. On December 20, samples from suspected livestock (sheep and goats) were collected from Masalani, Ijara Sub County and Balambala, Balambala Sub County for testing and were confirmed positive for RVF on December 22. Given the favourable environmental conditions (heavy rainfall and flooding), uncontrolled movement of viraemic animals (in search of water and pasture), the report observed, there was an increased risk of disease spreading. “It should be highlighted that an RVF outbreak will have a severe economic impact on this pastoral community that is dependent on livestock production,” it cautioned. Kenya has witnessed numerous RVF outbreaks- in 1998, 2006-2007, 2014 and 2018. In 2018, the country conducted its last known RVF’s animal vaccination whose coverage is unknown. “Although the country has local capacity, response measures remain insufficient. Vector control measures have not been conducted and a national vector control plan has yet to be developed,” it added. Therefore, WHO is working with the Ministry of Health, FAO and OIE to investigate RVF outbreak, animal quarantine, ante and post-mortem handling and carry out sensitisations of community health volunteers, healthcare workers and veterinarians? Awareness of the risk factors of RVF infection, integrated vector control activities and protective measures against mosquito bites is essential in reducing human infection and deaths, WHO advised. “Public health messages for risk reduction should be based on public awareness and public education on RVF, reducing the risk of mosquito bite, routine animal vaccination, and restriction of animal movements, among others. Apart from the RVF pastoral communities are grappling with the destruction caused on pasture land by huge swarms of desert locusts. Swaths of farmland and range-land have been destroyed since the country reported its first desert locust case in December 2019. DESTRUCTION BY LOCUSTS The aftermath caused serious economic and social impact after pastures and cropping in counties like Samburu, Isiolo and Marsabit were decimated. Mandera, Wajir, Samburu, Garissa, Turkana, Laikipia, Meru, Kitui, Embu, Machakos, Murang’a, Makueni and Kajiado counties were also affected. Nevertheless, there was reprieve after the government together with the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) in January last year rolled out ground surveillance and aerial spraying in Wajir, Mandera and Marsabit. The measure in some way assuaged extensive damages inflicted on farmers and pastoralists. Data from Food Security and Nutrition Working Group (FSNWG) East Africa Regional Desert Locust Impact Monitoring round two report showed that swarm attacks fell from 40 per cent (June/July) to 23 per cent (October/November/December) last year. Cropping losses dropped to 16 per cent from 28 per cent between the period. Equally, livestock rearing homes also reported a 23 per cent decline in rangeland invasions to 32 per cent.