A Stanbic Bank branch on Kimathi Street, Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG The Kenyan subsidiary of multinational retailer Shoprite Holdings has cleared the Sh1.5 billion Stanbic Bank Kenya loan as it exits the local market due to losses. Stanbic Bank Wednesday told the Business Daily that the retailer cleared the unsecured loan last December. The loan was denominated in Kenya Shillings and attracted an interest rate of 9.7 per cent. “They completely cleared. They paid it off end of last December,” said Charles Mudiwa, the Stanbic Bank Kenya chief executive in an interview. The payment offers relief to Stanbic given the recent debt crises in the Kenyan supermarket businesses which operate on an asset-light business model. Shoprite entered the Kenyan market in 2018 and was set to permanently close its operations in January after suffering a Sh3.2 billion loss in the year to June 2020. However, the High Court in January barred it from completing the exit until a dispute with a shopper who was injured inside one of its branches is settled. Shoprite will now have to stay in business longer unless it strikes a deal with the individual. The South Africa-based retailer closed its four outlets in Westgate Mall, Garden City, Karen branch and the City Mall branch in Nyali, Mombasa and shed hundreds of jobs after its local operations underperformed. Shoprite revealed in the latest annual report covering up to June 2020 that the Kenyan market failed to meet the return-on-investment targets. “We have decided we will not allocate any further capital in the pursuit of a Kenyan market greenfields expansion,” said Shoprite chief executive Pieter Engelbrecht. “The region has not met our required return-on-investment targets and, while this factor is in part because the investment is still subscale, we believe now is not the time for Shoprite to lean in and invest further into new territory.” The retailer also wants to either find a local partner or sell its Nigerian supermarket business where it has 25 stores. Shoprite had opened a total of four stores with plans to expand further before it started scaling down its operations last year. It is among the foreign retailers that had sought to fill the void left by the collapse of former supermarket giant Nakumatt Holdings.