Rapper Notorious BIG released Ten Crack commandments 25 years ago and today’s article is my own witless rendition to that classic. Let us call it the Ten Hustler’s Commandments. All 10 gems are borrowed from a nondescript entrepreneur by the name of Romeen Sheth - founder, Metasys (I think they derogatively call that ‘’biting” in Hip Hop). Here’s to all (potential) entrepreneurs building real businesses and crafting their own future. Number one. Don’t over study outliers. (for example billionaires). Outliers are unique by definition. If you obsess yourself with analysing how they succeeded, you’ll likely glean the wrong lessons. If the ball bounced slightly sideways, their outcome would probably have been completely different. Number two. Internalise asymmetric upside. An asymmetric bet is simple to understand. If you lose, you lose 1x. But if you win, there’s no limit to the upside. You want to make sure you’re taking enough swings (and the right types) to give yourself a shot at meaningful upside. Number three. Building is 99 percent execution, one percent vision. People glamourise vision and foresight too much. A majority of any project is actually really boring. It’s all about being present, consistent and giving it the right level of effort day-in and day-out. This is deceptively difficult. Number four. Never get high on your own supply. You’re not really that bright. You’re not the only one with the monopoly of ideas. And the quicker you figure that out, the better it is for you and all your co-workers. Number five. “Anything is possible” doesn’t mean ‘’everything is probable” It’s important to understand whether something is likely and the impact of a stated outcome. There’s no right or wrong, but you should always be aware of the risk you’re taking and its implications. Number six. Spend time with people who are better than you. The quickest way to accelerate your personal growth is to surround yourself with people that are better than you at specific things. Pick their brains and learn from them. It is the fastest way to level up. Number seven. Learn just enough to be dangerous. You don’t need to be an expert, but you should know enough about one; how the world works, two, how business works and three, how people think. Most people surprisingly don’t, if you do, you’ll be an asset to your organisation. Number eight. Seek out situations that maximise your value. Ask yourself these three questions; what am I good at? What does the market need? Three, what do I want to do? Number nine. Optionality caps your downside and your upside. As you progress in your career, the accumulation of skill is more attractive than the promise of potential. This shift can be painful - it happens very suddenly. Sacrifice optionality early, so you can get more of it later. Number 10. Break up challenges into five component parts. Incentives. Personalities. Perspectives. Constraints. Resources. Most difficult situations will be a function of two or three of these. Mr Mwanyasi is the managing director at Canaan Capital