Late last year, the African Development Bank (AfDB) unpacked some interesting discoveries in its report Trade Finance: Overcoming Challenges. Some notable points include; One, although banks support a third of Africa’s business, trade finance gap is still in excess of Sh9 trillion annually. Two; despite the long-held view that small and medium sized (SMEs) are the most significant contributor to African economies, they account for just over a quarter of banks’ trade finance assets - first time trade finance clients of these banks account for much less. Three; only 28 percent of banks’ total trade finance portfolio benefits SMEs, while the bulk of trade finance facilities serve large companies. Altogether, one easily summarises that regional trade finance is one huge under-explored and under-funded space. But in every problem lies opportunity. Today’s article is about trade receivables securitisation. What is trade securitisation? This is a finance concept designed to monetise income generating assets usually involving financing arrangements secured on the cash flows arising from those assets. Why trade securitisation? The idea is to help SMEs mostly with trade receivables currently on their balance sheets (and cannot get financing from banks) by providing enhanced liquidity and mitigating the accounting impact of overdue receivables. In addition to the liquidity upsides of monetising future receivables, transferring economic ownership of certain trade receivables (and, therefore, the risk associated therewith), may enable SMEs to limit the impact of exposure to credit risk relating to their counterparties and assist in managing their accounting and cash flow position. Why should alternative lenders consider this route? According to the AfDB report, the estimated default rate on trade finance transactions in 2011 and 2014 were four and five percent respectively compared to nine and 12 percent Non-Performing Loan (NPL) ratios for all bank asset classes. For countries such as Kenya, the Capital Markets Authority (CMA) issued initial regulations for Asset Backed Securities (ABSs) in the year 2017. The guidance note involves issuance of market securities, which are backed by trade receivables. Furthermore, there may well be pricing advantages too as securitisation is priced on the expected performance of receivables rather than the corporate’s general rating. Why should policy makers support securitisation? Taking Kenya as the perfect microcosm of Africa, SMEs contribution to the national economy is north of 30 percent. SMEs are also complementary to large firms as ancillary units - underscoring the fundamental role played by the SMEs towards economic growth and development. In addition, it is anticipated that trade receivables securitisation will become a key tool for plugging the funding gap. Today, the continent’s shares of global GDP and trade stand at only three percent, yet it accounts for 11 percent of the world’s population. To increase this contribution, trade finance must be genuinely accessible and affordable to those who need it. Securitisation opens a new way to provide this. Especially now as companies navigate the uncertainty of the post-pandemic world, securitisation techniques should become an attractive option to companies seeking to maximise their balance sheets. Mr Mwanyasi is the managing director at Canaan Capital