Kebs managing director Bernard Njiraini. FILE PHOTO | NMG A Dubai-based firm is set to receive a compensation of Sh1.6 billion from the Kenyan government for breach of a fuel inspection tender by the Kenya Bureau of Standards (Kebs) 11 years ago. This follows a decision of the Supreme Court judges to reject a request to review a judgment they passed in December last year that found Kebs liable for breach of the contract awarded to Geo-Chem Middle East in 2009. The Apex court led by acting Chief Justice Philomena Mwilu said the application for stay of the court's judgment dated December 18, 2020 was “an appeal in disguise”. In urging court to suspend execution of the judgment, Kebs argued that the application was in public interest because the payment of the amount involve expenditure of public funds, occasioning excessive burden on the taxpayer. It added that the company is not registered as a tax payer in Kenya and that there were exceptional circumstances to allow the court stay execution of its own judgment. But the Supreme judges said the application was a disguised appeal which sought to reopen matters already determined with finality by the court. They added that the review application did not meet the threshold of exceptional circumstances. Other judges in the bench were justices Mohhamed Ibrahim, Smokin Wanjala, Njoki Ndung'u and Isaac Lenaola. The case landed at the Supreme Court after the foreign firm filed an appeal against the Appellate Court's decision that had stopped the payments. Instead, the Supreme Court maintained a ruling delivered by the High Court three years ago in favour of the firm, which had been contracted by Kebs in 2009 to inspect and test imported petroleum products for quality assurance and quantity determination. While upholding the High Court's decision to endorse the award of Sh1.6 billion made to the firm by an arbitration tribunal, the Supreme Court found that the Appeallate Court had acted outside its authourity when overturning the award. "We have no option but to hold that the Judgment of the Court of Appeal, to the extent to which it purported to interrogate the merits of an arbitral award, in the absence of the High Court’s pronouncement on the same, was rendered in excess of jurisdiction," said the Supreme judges.