Most of us unfortunately do not really think. We merely convince ourselves that they are thinking and hope to get away with making others believe that we are thinking because some mental activity is going on in our minds. A lot of us play out past incidents in their minds. we exercise the mental faculty of our mind called "memory". That’s NOT thinking. I’m sure that you’ve have experienced watching someone's actions and wondered what they were thinking or if they were even thinking at all. I can almost see you nodding and smiling knowingly. Thinking is the highest function of which we are capable as humans. We float in an “ocean” of thought-energy where all the knowledge there ever was or ever will be is present, and we are surrounded by abundance in nature. Nature knows no such thing as "failure". To begin to penetrate the world of wealth, it is crucially important that we begin to think. We want to open our minds to a stream of thought energy which will create an image (a consciousness), of prosperity. SUCCESS MINDSET: Success is abnormal, unusual, and unnatural, It is something achieved by the minority of people who follow their goal without a care about being guided by our own natural preferences and prejudices. For instance, most of us prefer not to talk to people about something they might not like to hear or talk about. Think about it; the average human is highly resistant to change even when it is for their own good and therefore prone to escape our efforts to persuade them to do something they don't want to do by striking at the most important weakness that we possess namely; our desire to be appreciated. Look around, reflect and listen. You will note , that it is easier to persuade someone to a particular course of action than to find someone who already wants to do it. Habit fits right here. Every single qualification for success is acquired through habit. We consciously or unconsciously form habits. Our habits work to cumulatively form positive or negative results. If we are not intentional about forming good habits, we unconsciously you will form bad ones. We are the kind of people we are because we have formed the habit of being those kinds of people and the ONLY way we can change is through changing our habits. The successful people among us are the few who form the habit of doing the things that failures do not like to do, PRICE OF SUCCESS Any idea, plan or purpose can be planted in your mind by repetition of thought empowered by faith and expectation. This can be done in a relatively short period of time and the compensation is delightful! It takes much discipline, tremendous desire and loads of diligent effort which is the probable reason why few people ever actually alter their thoughts from poverty consciousness to an awareness of prosperity. You know; lack and limitation can only exist when we make room for them in our minds for them to manifest in our lives. An awareness of prosperity on the other hand knows no lack or limitation. If not born wealthy, we must develop a deep understanding of; (i) how we have been conditioned (ii) why we are getting the results we are (iii) how we can change our way of thinking (our conditioning) RESPONSIBILITY Everything that happens in your life - good or bad - doesn't come by way of luck, lack of luck, fate, karma or sins of your forefathers. What happens in your life is up to you and the choices you make. It's these very choices that will either work in harmony with the natural Laws of the Universe, or will act dysfunctionally against these very same laws. As we approach the second quarter of the year and the commencement, you're probably already thinking of your resolutions for 2022. If you are like most people, you make them every year only to slide back to your comfort zone by April and then wait until the end of the year to recommit to them again. You're caught up in the annual 'New Year Resolution Cycle' without achieving the results that you so desire. Just when you think you've made the perfect commitment to your goals, something come rearing up in front of you. This "something" prevents you from acting on the resolutions you've set for yourself sending your goals further into the distant future. We call this "something" the Terror Barrier. Do not allow the Terror Barrier to steal dreams from you.