A third-year university student will be paid Sh24.4 million by Nakuru based company after he was paralysed in an accident caused by a lorry belonging to the company seven years ago. A bench of three judges ruled that Jubilee Haulers Ltd, its owner Vipul Patel and the driver of the lorry will pay Mr Brian Muchiri the amount after the 2014 accident, which left him with permanent disability. Justices Martha Koome, Daniel Musinga and Agnes Murgor upheld the decision of the High Court but only reduced the amount from Sh28.9 million to Sh24.4 million. “Having considered the various authorities that were cited by both parties, and bearing in mind the award of Sh7,200,000 as loss of future earning capacity, which is a relevant consideration in assessment of general damages, we think the award of Sh8,000,000 was inordinately high,” the Judges said. Evidence presented to court was that the student, then aged 19, was travelling in a matatu from Nakuru town heading to Mangu farm in Rongai. The matatu was then hit by the lorry coming from the opposite side. He sued the company accusing it of negligence because the lorry was being driven at an excessive speed, without due care and attention for other road users, and failure to slow down or swerve to avert the accident. He told the court that his studies were curtailed due to the injuries and as a result of the accident, he requires a wheelchair and a replacement every two years, future medical care including services of a nurse at a salary of Sh12,000 per month. The High Court had awarded him Sh8 million as general damages for pain, suffering and loss of amenities, Sh7.2 million as damages for loss of earning capacity, Sh3.9 million for nurse aid and Sh4.3 million for future medical expenses. Other compensation was Sh3.9 million for medical equipment and supplies, Sh250,000 for electric chair, Sh350,000 for electric bed and Sh885,844 as special damages. Aggrieved by that decision the company and two other parties sued appealed leading to the Sh4 million reduction in the total compensation.