A family shares a meal in Eldoret. Experts are calling for increased production to stem hunger in developing countries, but the World Hunger Education Service points that the world produces enough food for everyone only that food produced is lost or wasted. Photo/File If you do not eat or drink everything you are served, then you will have accumulated 99 kilogrammes of wasted food by the end of the year, on average, according to a new study. Leaving leftovers on your plate after every meal could be contributing to the global food wastage problem even as millions of people die of hunger yearly. An estimated 931 million tonnes of food, or 17 percent of total food available to consumers in 2019, went into the waste bins of households, retailers, restaurants and other food services, a survey by United Nations conducted to support global efforts to halve food wastage by 2030 reveals. The weight roughly equals that of 23 million fully-loaded 40-tonne trucks — enough bumper-to-bumper vehicles to circle the Earth seven times. Up to 61 percent of it comes from households, 26 percent from food services and 13 percent from retail stores. The Food Waste Index Report 2021 by Unep and British partner organisation Waste and Resources Action Programme (WRAP) analysed 152 food waste data points in 54 countries. Data from the study indicates that every Kenyan trashes 99 kilogrammes of food every year, with the country wasting a total of 5,217,367 tonnes of food every 12 months, and was marked in the study as ‘medium confidence’ in its commitment to control the habit. Other African countries that were ranked as ‘medium confidence’ are South Africa, Rwanda, Nigeria, Zambia and Ethiopia. In Africa, only Ghana was labelled as ‘high confidence’, as the country averaged a waste of 84 kilos of waste per citizen per year, and a total waste of 2,555,332 tonnes a year. A separate study published in 2020 by the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) Kenya said an estimated Sh72 billion is lost every season by not addressing food loss and waste. FAO estimates that sub-Saharan Africa loses Sh432 billion annually due to wasteful consumption. Hamisi Williams, FAO Kenya assistant representative, says farmers lose earnings as they struggle to manage, store and transport produce to the market. “Reducing food loss early in the supply chain — on the farm — is likely to yield the strongest positive result for greater food security. 30 percent of fresh produce gets wasted in post-harvest levels and markets,” he states. The Food Waste Index Report 2021 released on March 4 found that in nearly every country that has measured food waste, it was substantial, regardless of income level, threatening food security and the environment. “Reducing food waste would cut greenhouse gas emissions, slow the destruction of nature through land conversion and pollution, enhance the availability of food and thus reduce hunger and save money at a time of global recession,” Inger Andersen, Executive Director of Unep said. The survey, conducted every two years, established that most of this waste comes from households, which discard 11 percent of the total food available at the consumption stage of the supply chain. Food services and retail outlets waste account for five percent and two percent respectively. “On a global scale, every person wastes 121 kilogrammes of consumer-level food each year, and 74 kilos of this happens in households,” it states. At a time climate action is lagging, 8-10 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions are associated with food that is not consumed, yet losses before consumer level are not taken into account. “If we want to get serious about tackling climate change, nature and biodiversity loss, and pollution and waste, businesses, governments and citizens around the world have to do their part to reduce food waste,” says Mr Anderson. Though food spoilage is a global problem, it is more prevalent in Africa because of poor physical infrastructure and technological mishaps. Lack of proper facilities, post-harvest losses and uncertain markets mean that 40 percent of food is wasted before it can be eaten. Farmers and consumers have been taken hostage by middlemen because flow of information is controlled by a few players in the agricultural value chain. With 690 million people in the world affected by hunger in 2019, a number that is expected to rise sharply with Covid-19, and three billion people unable to afford a healthy diet, commitment to reduce food waste at home has never been as critical. The report urges countries to raise climate ambition by including food waste in Nationally Determined Contributions to the Paris Agreement, while strengthening food security and cutting costs to households. This, it adds, will make food waste prevention also a primary area for inclusion in Covid-19 recovery strategies. “For a long time, it was assumed that food waste in the home was a significant problem only in developed countries,” said Marcus Gover, the chief executive of WRAP. “With only nine years to go, we will not achieve SDG 12 Target 3 if we do not significantly increase investment in tackling food waste in the home globally. This must be a priority for governments, international organisations, businesses and philanthropic foundations.” Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) target 12.3 aims at halving per-capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels and reducing food losses along production and supply chains, but such efforts will require more awareness and commitment. A challenge exists in collecting clean data about food waste, especially in the Developing World, but a growing number of countries have measured food waste in recent years. The report finds that 14 countries, in the Developed World, already have household food waste data collected in a way that is compatible with the Food Waste Index. “A further 38 countries have household food waste data where small changes in methodology, geographical coverage or sample size would allow them to create an SDG 12.3-compatible estimate,” says the research. The new global consumer-level food waste estimates were generated from existing data points and extrapolations based upon the estimates observed in other countries. With 75 percent of the world’s population living in a country with a directly observed food waste estimate at the household level, the confidence of the estimate in the sector is higher. “With far lower direct estimates at the retail and food service level, confidence in estimates in these sectors is lower.” The proportion of inedible parts remains an important knowledge gap in lower-income countries. According to Betty Kibaara, the associate director at the Rockefeller Foundation’s Africa Office, the amount of food lost or wasted every year could feed an estimated 1.6 billion people but instead, 795 million people go hungry worldwide. “The impact on the environment is staggering, with more than 25 percent of the world’s fresh water and 20 percent of its farmland used to produce food that is never consumed. Additionally, food loss and waste generate about eight percent of global greenhouse emissions,” she explains. In Eastern Africa alone, an estimated three million refugees are at risk of dying of hunger, according to the latest United Nations Report on Food Security. This has led the international body to call for Sh27 billion in additional funding over the next six months to help refugees get enough to eat, particularly children and pregnant women who need nutritious food for development. But in the meantime, finding innovative ways to put food waste to productive use is helping create jobs and improve sustainability. East African start-up Agricycle began with a simple-to-use solar dehydrator that allowed fruit farmers in Kenya and Uganda to turn perishable produce into a longer-lasting dry-fruit snack. Since then, it has developed a separate business to buy and market the dried fruit, selling it to stores in the US. “We’ve created just under 7,000 livelihoods to date, and they make between seven to 10 times the average daily wage,” Agricycle founder and CEO Josh Shefner says. In Spain, renowned designer Júlia Roca Vera has created a range of cosmetics, including cleansers and moisturisers, based on unwanted foodstuff. In her venture, she uses fruits that have been considered too ugly to appeal to shoppers as the main raw materials. The products are sold in reusable, ceramic containers to enhance their sustainability. Canadian start-up Alt Tex is manufacturing polylactic acid (PLA) from food waste, to form an alternative to polyester. The starch and sugars from unwanted food are ideal for the production of PLA, the company says. Unlike polyester, PLA is a biodegradable plastic substitute. And unlike some other makers of PLA, which use commercially grown PLA crops like corn, Alt Tex is working with the food and drink industry to collect and reuse waste.