Parliament buildings in Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG Parliament, and by extension politicians, remains a cult of personal benefits and never hesitates to act with zero regards for its constituents. For starters, Parliament is the only institution vested with the power to tax; which means that, as institution, it has the fiduciary obligation of oversighting public finances. But instead, Parliament has recently vacated its fiduciary obligations and gone to bed with the Executive (Presidency) and has continued to rubberstamp expenditure overruns, debt binge and plunder of the fiscus. An unusual report, dated March 2020, by Parliament's Budget and Appropriations Committee, which is tasked with the role of scrutinising budget numbers, on the budget proposals for fiscal year 2020/21, offered a glimpse into a steamy romance between the Executive and the Legislature on fiscal affairs. In the report, authored at a time when Kenya's ruling Jubilee coalition began tearing apart (and probably created room for open dissent), committee members basically accused the Executive of fudging budget numbers, including rosy macroeconomic projections used to project revenues, and unreliable borrowing and debt repayment numbers. You can’t help but wonder that these are the same fiscal frameworks they had been approving in previous years. Even Parliament’s own Budget Office (PBO), a non-partisan professional office, in a recent report titled 'Budget Options for 2021/2022 and the Medium Term', offers a stinging criticism of Kenya's current budget making process, saying that '...decisions in the overall budget are not being guided by reality but rather by the need to indicate favourable fiscal position'. Quite a bold assessment. In 2020, as the coronavirus pandemic reared its ugly head on the economy, the government, in mid-2020, moved to propose tax measures to cushion the population, which, inter alia, included loosening of the income tax bands and reduction of value-added tax (VAT) from 16 percent to 14 percent. Understandably, Parliament promptly passed the measures. However, after only six months, and at a time when the worst of the Covid-19 overhang on the economy was yet to pass, the Executive proposed to withdraw all the tax measures. Parliament promptly rubberstamped the proposal(s) without raising any objection(s) on whether households and businesses (especially SMEs) have recovered. And then there is now the issue of raising the country’s debt ceiling as proposed by the National Treasury. And there is a precursor to this. In November 2019, the same Parliament had rubberstamped a move to amend Section 26 (1c) of Kenya's Public Finance Management regulations of 2015 which, as a matter of fiscal responsibility, had capped public debt, in net present value terms, at half the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). But through the rubberstamp, debt measurement was re-calibrated from a ratio (50 percent of GDP) to a nominal figure of Sh9 trillion, a move that effectively dislocated debt from the economy. And now that the sh9 trillion ceiling is fast approaching, the Treasury wants the ceiling adjusted upwards to God knows where. Once again, Parliament is on standby to approve a new ceiling. Even worse, the same Parliament has, for the fiscal year 2021/22, just approved an expenditure ceiling of Sh3 trillion against a revenue target of Sh2 trillion, leaving a gaping budget hole of Sh1 trillion. Who in their sane mind approves such a budget? Essentially, this is entrenching fiscal indiscipline. And coming from Parliament, the only institution vested with the power to instill fiscal discipline, shows a large degree of capture. It would be best if Parliament asked the Executive to live within its means. But no they can’t. Combine that with an overzealous executive and you get a loose cocktail; and a government keen to expropriate its pie at all costs. Milton Friedman once said that if the government took over the Sahara desert, there would be a shortage of sand!