Petroleum PS Andrew Kamau. file photo | nmg Petroleum Principal Secretary Andrew Kamau risks a surcharge of Sh870 million for a botched plan to supply poor homes with cheap cooking gas. The parliamentary watchdog committee has given Mr Kamau three months to explain why public funds were committed to the project, which aborted after contractors delivered substandard cylinders whose valves were prone to fire hazards. “Where the accounting officer fails to provide an explanation, the accounting officer (during the period under review) should be surcharged Sh870,339,283 pursuant to the provisions of section 202 of the Public Finance Management [PFM] Act, 2012,” the National Assembly Public Accounts Committee (PAC) said in a new report. Under the Mwananchi Gas Project, more than four million households were to be supplied with six-kilo cooking gas cylinders and burners for a discounted price of Sh2,000 each in three years, with refills costing Sh840. The plan had been piloted in Machakos and Kajiado counties. The public finance management law imposes personal liability to a public officer where loss of public funds occurs. “A public officer is personally liable for any loss sustained by the national government that is attributable to — the fraudulent or corrupt conduct, or negligence, of the officer,” states the PFM Act. Further, the law stipulates that the Treasury may, by civil proceedings brought in a court of competent jurisdiction, recover damages from a public officer for any loss for which the officer is liable. The Public Procurement and Disposal Act 2015, which came into force on January 7, 2016, made principal secretaries, chief executives of parastatals and county accounting officers fully responsible for all procurement contracts in their respective organisations. Mr Kamau was retained as the Principal Secretary in the Ministry of Petroleum and Mining last month but with an expanded mandate after President Uhuru Kenyatta announced the merging of the State Mining Department with that of Petroleum. He had been appointed PS for the State Department for Petroleum in December 2015. The parliamentary watchdog committee, chaired by Ugunja MP Opiyo Wandayi, inquired into the Mwananchi Gas Project following queries raised by the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the State Department for Petroleum for the year 2017/18. The audit showed taxpayers did not get value for money arising from shortcomings in the implementation of the project. It found that contracts were awarded on the basis of unenforceable performance bonds and with no performance durations. The cooking gas subsidy plan was initiated by the defunct Ministry of Energy and Petroleum during the 2016/2017 financial year. The plan was aimed at cutting reliance on kerosene and charcoal, which are not environment-friendly but are the main source of fuel for most rural and urban poor households. The project entailed the supply and distribution of LPG cylinders, grills and burners to households at subsidised prices and the erection of facilities to store the cylinders at local distribution points. The audit showed that 10 firms had been contracted by the ministry in May 2017 to supply various components of the LPG gas project at an aggregate cost of Sh1 billion. As at the end of June 2018, the State Department for Petroleum had spent a total of Sh870 million. A total of 109,649 six-kilogramme cylinders, 329,422 burners and 329,260 grills have been lying in State-owned National Oil Corporation (Nock) warehouses since the distribution was halted in 2018. The exercise aborted after it emerged that some contractors had supplied 67,251 faulty gas cylinders prone to fire eruptions. Nock suspended the project citing distribution challenges. When he appeared before PAC, Mr Kamau said the project had not stalled but that it had been delayed by cases filed against the ministry and Nock by the Consumers Federation of Kenya (Cofek). “The State Department procured a Third Party Inspection Services in FY 2019/20 after the withdrawal of the court case by Cofek and clearance from the Directorate of Criminal Investigations for LPG cylinders which were procured in financial year 2016/17. In conclusion, the Mwananchi Gas Project is ongoing and has not stalled,” he said. Of the Sh870 million expenditure, PAC said the ministry had paid out Sh481 million, leaving a pending bill of Sh389 million as at June 2018.