Mr John Ngumi. FILE PHOTO | NMG The decision taken by President Uhuru Kenyatta to appoint a task force to review Kenya’s power purchase agreements is a good one. The taskforce will hopefully provide a long-term solution to the problem of expensive power in Kenya that has hurt the competitiveness of the country’s manufacturing and saddled households with high electricity bills. For a long time, both Kenya Power and energy sector watchers have pointed to the power purchase agreements for the utility’s poor performance. Kenya Power’s efforts to cover for the ever rising power purchase costs through higher tariffs have predictably been met with tough resistance both by the regulator and electricity consumers, leaving the firm in a precarious financial position. This is why we agree with the President that it is time for a reset of these agreements to make them more sustainable. For the producers, some of whom are earning more than their fair share even when their plants are idle, it is important to note that they need a functioning and healthy Kenya Power to remain in business. The company is the sole national power distributor in the country, so if it goes bust, so will they. No one is arguing that they should sell their power at a loss or that they shouldn’t be allowed to do business with the utility. In fact, it is our view that agreeing to more sustainable sale agreements will open up further business opportunities down the road, since it allows Kenya Power the financial flexibility to increase the load it is taking up from independent producers, especially of green energy. What we are asking for, and this should be the goal of the taskforce, is a power purchase plan that works for all parties involved, striking a balance between the needs of the producers and those of the utility and the consumer. Such a plan that will see the power producers and Kenya Power itself make a decent profit from their endeavours, thus ensuring the sustainability of their businesses. At the same time, a fair power purchase regime will also allow Kenya Power to charge lower tariffs on consumers, easing the pain of high household energy budgets and giving local manufacturers a chance at competing fairly with their peers in the region.