 It’s a moot point in Kenya whether we humans have any responsibility not to be cruel to animals, but it is not a fudged point in Kenyan law. The law is clear that to starve an animal or cause it any other cruelty is punishable with fines or six months in jail. But it’s a law that makes for a gulf between our national statute, and many national attitudes, as has been pushed into my face in the last month. For this year opened to our decision to close our company offices, after nine months of staff working from home, and with Covid-19 having raised many other business challenges besides. But one of the matters that came up was how to rehouse the dog and several cats that lived on the premises. These animals, much loved over many years by my family, were my children’s pets when they were growing up, long before both sons left for study abroad and universities. The animals had stayed on living in the same house when my family moved out and the company moved in. However, with the offices now closing, long-term homes needed to be found for them. In December, I discussed this with a man who had been their carer. He told me he would be moving back to Kisii and, when he went upcountry for a holiday, he took photos of what he said was his compound and we discussed making good the fence so the dog could run loose and not be tied. We finally agreed, in February, he would take the animals. I sent him Sh9,300 to repair the fence, gave him a laptop for email and zoom calls, Sh22,000 to buy two months’ of cat and dog food, hired a car for him to drive them to Kisii, and covered countless extra costs. Now, I had a valued friend who had told me the plan would not work. He said, ‘I don’t mean to speak badly of anyone, but he will not see animals as you do. He will take them there, come straight back to Nairobi, and they will starve.’ Of course, that friend was right. That gardener I thought so decent didn’t just take them and dump them, he bought himself a new suit and shoes with their food money, and when I sent people to look for my animals set thugs on them and wrote saying he was resigning and if I wanted to know where the dog was I needed to send (a lot of) money for the information and access. They call it blackmail in old-fashioned places, and eating animal food money, they call theft. A doctor friend helped, the police tracked the animals and got them collected, but then explained that if I wanted to prosecute, it would be a civil matter for me to bring. Because across the whole journey no-one (except that one doctor) could understand why I even cared if my family’s pets died miserably of starvation and maltreatment. Yet, when the animals were found, after just four weeks, they were in very bad shape and were indeed at risk of passing. At the very end, the doctor called me one final time and said the gardener had kept saying to the police only that ‘these animals are such a pain’, which made my heart freeze, because it was an exact mimicry of something another person at the offices had said maybe a hundred times. She always disliked the pets, even in the role of guard dog, and could never understand why I would care about feeding them or buying food. So I know there is nothing strange about thinking starving animals is our right, as a dominant race. But I truly believe what we do shapes who we are. So, if someone cannot care for animals humanely, are they humane? And, indeed, how do we rate their humanity? For anyone can choose to behave like a beast — and what else defines a beast, if it is not cruelty? So is it really my concern that was wrong, or the incomprehension at it?