Crown Paints Kenya showroom during in Nyali, Mombasa. FILE PHOTO | NMG While technology adoption, in retrospect, is often associated with smartphones, appliances, and a tonne of other gadgets, the truth is, it has pervaded all sectors. The paint and coating industry is no exception. Most people are yet to appreciate the exclusive features and advancements in the paints manufacturing and servicing sector, which is no surprise since up to 2018, digital technology was only applied in a limited number of territories in the sector. Today, the paint and coatings manufacturers invest a great deal of time, capital, and talent into creating disruptive products. Drawing from market statistics, trends in the sector locally and globally, paint and coating companies are harnessing the power of technology to contribute to the expansion of the market and address problems. Manufacturers can now deliver more than just a tin of paint to a customer. And although addressing the lack of top-level digital strategy management remains a fickle business, proper adoption of technological trends is bound to create more disruptions in the industry. Significant innovations over the past few years, including the creation of paints that are safe, durable and highly textured and designer finishes, allow consumers to express their artistic imaginations. As opposed to the limited colour options, customers have a litany of options to choose from depending on budget, taste, the design idea in mind and the finish. Consequently, successful paint companies have shifted focus away from producing paint to selling them along with key tools that offer faster application that provides ease of application, quality and smooth finish, less wastage and speed. The transformation has moved from painted walls to decorative services. From dial-a-paint services to painting as a service for offering consultancy services have helped companies to differentiate themselves to act as beautification partners for homes. Quality consciousness is also going up with people understanding importance of quality products which have driven innovation within the sector to offering long-lasting paints. This has led to reduction of repainting from every three to four years to the more cost-effective and economical on the paints lasting up to 15 years. Self-cleaning paints are other innovations that have been made possible by technology by carefully balancing and mixing; technology now allows manufacturers to offer self-cleaning paints specially designed for the dirt to wash off when it rains. Of course, there are other advancements that we are yet to fully realise in Kenya paint industry such as the adoption of data monetisation and embracing coating-as-a-service business models and exploring the application of big data, AI to identify opportunities. The Kenyan paint and coating industry still has a long way to go. There is a great deal of research going online during the inspiration phase and paint companies in Kenya can use them for colour and product innovation.