President Uhuru Kenyatta addresses the nation from State House, Nairobi on March 12, 2021. The new round of restrictions placed by the government last week to control the third wave of the Covid-19 pandemic are bound to hit businesses and ordinary Kenyans hard. We commend the government’s agility in taking measures to safeguard lives of Kenyans, but urge that the same agility must be shown in protecting their economic wellbeing as well. But the government must go a step further and provide a soft landing to the economy, which is bracing for a fresh hit with the new restrictions. Thousands of jobs have already been lost since the virus first reached our shores a year ago and caused two straight quarters of economic contraction, with the hospitality sector the worst hit. Last year, when President Uhuru Kenyatta first announced measures to prevent the virus from spreading, the monetary and fiscal authorities followed up with a raft of measures to protect businesses and individuals from the ensuing economic hit. We saw the introduction of moratoriums on loan repayments, tax cuts, removal of fees on mobile transactions and the announcement of a stimulus package meant to create jobs. This time around, the authorities have been silent on measures, if any are intended, to give businesses a respite from the looming crisis. While some of the measures—such as blanket income tax cuts—are unlikely to be reinstated, there is still room for government to step in and save the economy from the worst of it. It should consider extending the repayment moratoriums on banks loans beyond the June deadline to allow businesses reorganise their finances to reflect the new reality of reduced income. Those that are directly affected by the lockdown and extended curfew, mainly in the hospitality sector, could also be given a chance to defer taxes, or part of their taxes, since they are back to the mass closures that put them on their knees last year. Such measures will go a long way in saving these businesses from total ruin, and in the process save thousands of jobs. It will also show that the government does care for the welfare of the ordinary citizen, in a week when it has taken a lot of flak over the new round of restrictions.