Health Cabinet Secretary Mutahi Kagwe (centre) briefs media on the rollout of the Covid-19 vaccine to counties outside the offices of the Council of Governors on March 10, 2021. NMG PHOTO Today, there is much public expectation that President Uhuru Kenyatta will announce the scrapping of our wartime-like, one-year dusk to dawn curfew. It’s also a year since our first coronavirus case. Not by coincidence, our health nabobs now tell us that Covid-19 positivity rates are back on the rise. This backdrop seems set up for another extension of the end to Kenya’s largely informal night life. Let us imagine differently. That we have learnt from this difficult pandemic. And that we can translate this learning into “win-win” positivity going forward. To begin, vaccines notwithstanding, it is necessary to view Covid-19 not as a temporal moment, but as a condition for the future. In other words, it’s not about a “post-Covid-19” episode, but a “living with Covid-19” future. Once we get past this uncomfortable thought, then the question is not if, but when, to scrap the curfews and reopen the economy. This requires that we envisage Kenya as a 24-hour economy, and then ensure that we enforce appropriate health and safety protocols to get the self-said economy to work. This, of course, is about choices and consequences. The researchers at Citi (bank) tell us Tanzania was the fastest growing African economy in 2020. They didn’t close down. They made a consequential choice. Tanzania’s is an extreme example, but it prompts us to consider further lessons from this Covid-19 hiatus. To begin, the world of work has changed for good. The digital response to movement restrictions now means that it’s less about the “corner office” and more about the “office in the house corner”. Welcome to WFH, (working from home), something I’ve enjoyed and experienced for a decade. But it’s beyond the world of work. The only global economic number that has shown positive growth during these pandemic times is actual trade. This business of exchange for value will always be with us. It isn’t rocket science that mobile money has equally grown in importance as a medium of exchange. I’m still on this reopening track. Private sector is reimagining work and business. Agile flexibility and resilient adaptability are the new CSFs (critical success factors). “Creative destruction” is the new black. What about public sector? Let’s offer a reopening context to the ongoing 2021/22 national budget process. Step one is to throw out the entire budget. Italy did that early in the pandemic. Parliament’s Budget and Appropriations Committee has half-tried that with specific fiscal limits and very IMF-like policy recommendations. Too easy, just throw out the budget and start again. While it may be too late to think about the sort of lifeline support that countries in the West are offering their citizens, it does no harm to refine our budget discourse into a similar social contract obligation. To use my favourite “five household basics” framework; refocus the budget on three of them - food, basic needs (education, health, shelter, water and sanitation, personal security), jobs/income opportunities and cool down on the “mega-projects” madness. Legacies are not defined by shiny toys and buildings. The point here, as part of the reopening, is to cover basic needs, since we can’t afford basic income support. How do we pay for it? Seamless, if not painless, tax collection. The countries that provide lifelines to citizens don’t steal their taxes. This trust relation allows them to hibernate their economies. The truth of the matter is we can’t afford an economic hibernation. Neither can we afford all manner of punitive new taxes at the exact moment that we need to recover the economy. The reality is that the much heralded economic stimulus of 2020 was neither here nor there. That’s a distributional dilemma. Back to the beginning in a roundabout way. The brave decision must be to end the curfew and allow a full, and conditional, reopening of the economy. As I have argued before, Covid-19 is about three problems. Health (lives), economy (livelihoods), society (living). We are hammered on all three fronts. Or, put differently, we are not faced with a Hobson’s (take it or leave it) choice. At best, private sector, especially the less formal variety, is raring to go and public sector must adjust to public needs. At worst, we tolerate the “super-spreader” events loved by our political leaders. Mostly, and patiently, we have reflected and reimagined. It’s now time to get back to our day and night work.