The National Cereals and Produce Board, Nakuru depot. FILE PHOTO | NMG The latest ban on maize imports from Tanzania and Uganda on grounds that they contained high levels of aflatoxin is justified and in the interest of Kenyans. Though some millers has faulted the government for the ban, it is important that the safety of humans and livestock is maintained at all times. Aflatoxin — a byproduct of a mold that typically flourishes in corn or other grains in dry conditions — can be harmful to both humans and livestock, often resulting in fatalities. According to the World Health Organisation, aflatoxins are potent carcinogens and may affect all organ systems in humans and animals, especially the liver and kidneys. They cause liver cancer in humans, and have been linked to other types of cancer. In chickens, the effects of aflatoxins include liver damage, impaired productivity and reproductive efficiency, decreased egg production, inferior eggshell quality, inferior carcass quality and increased susceptibility to disease, the Food and Agriculture Organisation says. Pigs are also highly affected by aflatoxins, with the chronic effects largely apparent as liver damage. In cattle, aflatoxin causes weight loss as well as liver and kidney damage; where milk production is also reduced. These effects of aflatoxin are dire and we are better off protecting human and animal life than worrying about the disruptions caused by the ban on the supply chain. In any case, concerns over high aflatoxin levels on maize shipments from both Uganda and Tanzania are not new. Traders have previously been cautioned to ensure compliance with the health and safety standards. Clearly, such pleas were never heeded, resulting in the ban by the directorate in-charge of food safety. We urge the government to stay firm in enforcing the ban until such a time that traders would be ready to ship in safe products into the Kenyan market. The disruption in supply could be addressed through sales by the National Cereals and Produce Boards(NCPB), which has over the past months been mopping up stocks from farmers. Should the stocks at NCBP be exhausted, then we can turn to restricted importation of the commodity from safe markets as a last resort.