Passengers disembark from a Jambojet plane at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport, Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG Budget carrier Jambojet has increased flights to Mombasa, Malindi, Eldoret and Kisumu routes following high demand for passengers seeking air travel ahead of Easter holiday next month. The airline has increased frequencies on specific days from March 8 but airfare will remain unchanged. The airline has increased direct flights from Eldoret to Mombasa to five weekly from four initially with an additional flight on Thursday. The direct flight to the coastal city was introduced last year and targeted tourists from western Kenya who seek convenience of flying directly to the coastal city without making a stopover in Nairobi. The airline flies from Eldoret to Kisumu before proceeding to Mombasa. The carrier has indicated that there has been a surge in bookings on the week leading to Easter prompting them to enhance the number of flights to offer passengers more options. “Say yes to unforgettable Easter this year. We have increased frequencies during the Easter season visit into your schedule,” said the airline. Easter Holiday will start on April 2 and Kenyans will be travelling to different parts of the country for holidays or to meet family and friends. To the North Rift town of Eldoret, the carrier has increased frequencies to four from three every Thursday and Friday from March 11. Jambojet has also increased flights to the lakeside city of Kisumu to five every Monday starting March 8. This is from four flights previously. Kisumu is one of the most popular routes in the country after the coastal destinations. On the Malindi route, the carrier has enhanced the flights on Thursday to three from two previously, starting March 18. The carrier’s website indicates the prices are yet go up significantly as early bookings are cheaper. Jambojet is at the moment relying on local flights for its revenue as it is yet to start international flights to Entebbe and Kigali. The airline said last year that the resumption of international flights has been hampered by strict health guidelines issued by Rwanda and Uganda and that the demand for flying is still low. The carrier has been expanding its fleet, and last year acquired four new aircraft as it sought to expand to regional countries. Jamojet will have additional five flights to Mombasa starting March 18 with extra flights on Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Sunday.