Healthcare staff prepares to administer a Covid-19 vaccine. FILE PHOTO | AFP The thought of being admitted to an ICU sends shivers down anyone's spine, yet we pray that when fate lands one in this direction, we bank on modern equipment, the experience of specialist doctors and the advanced medicine to save a life. Therefore, the importance of advancement in critical care medicine in Kenya as part of healthcare system cannot be understated. The growing numbers of patients seeking this specialised treatment call for adequate infrastructure, training, equipment and funding. And not just purchase more modern beds, because they are of little value if they are not accompanied by requisite medical professionals. Critically ill patients on ventilators, for instance, require expert care by critical care physicians trained to calibrate and monitor the machines to optimise a patient's respiratory status. I am talking of knowledgeable medics who can make key decisions around medical management. If there is a lesson we have learnt from the currently ravaging Covid-19 pandemic, it is that delicate care of seriously ill patients coupled with hospital's readiness to handle such emergency patients en-mass yet observing utmost professionalism and care tests the nerves and preparedness of even the best. It calls for proper planning and investment in terms of equipment and trained manpower. Most hospitals have completely upgraded their critical management. A state-of-the-art critical care facility represents the pinnacle of any hospital’s approach to highly technological and sophisticated in-patient care. This pandemic has forced many hospital administrators to make fundamental changes in the way they allocate staff, space and machines—fundamental changes that may have been unthinkable before the pandemic. While most people know of ICU and that it is very crucial to the survival of critically ill patients, for the commoner, we need to simplify to them why Critical Care Medicine (CCM) is important to any specialised hospital and it means more than having state of the art beds and machines. For starters, CCM is a specialty that involves the management of patients with life-threatening, frequently complex medical and surgical illnesses in a specialized Intensive Care Unit (ICU) or similar facility. The CCM physician also called an Intensivist in some parts of the world, has expertise in the evaluation and management of these critically ill patients. These critically ill patients may have dysfunction or failure of one or more organ systems, including the cardiac, pulmonary, neurologic, liver, kidney or gastrointestinal systems. Specialists from anaesthesia, general medicine, pulmonology and surgery can undergo further training in critical care medicine to become a CCM physician. Modern ICUs make the work of doctors easier and Kenyans can feel comfortable seeking specialised medical care in their own country.