LPG vendor. FILE PHOTO | NMG LPG consumption in Kenya grew 74,000 tonnes in 2009 to 312,000 tonnes in 2019 — averaging 14 percent compound annual growth rate (CAGR).01_BODY_TEXT_2.0.2: From the 2019 census, 25 per cent of households use LPG for cooking, a 2.5 times growth from the nine percent in 2009 census. There are approximately three million households out of the 12 million that consume LPG, with about 4.5 million cylinders in circulation. A number of things conspired to drive this growth, including lowering of taxes in 2016 by removing VAT on LPG, the establishment of an exchange pool that allowed consumers to exchange different LPG cylinders from any point of sale and growing urbanisation and expansion of per capita GDP in the last 10 years. However, even with increasing consumption, it has been a painful experience for owners of the cylinders that carry the gas. Even with the volume growth, the share of tonnage distributed by mainstream gas companies has declined. The paradox being, the mainstream gas cylinder brand owners, own over 80 percent of the cylinders in circulation but control less than 20 percent share of the total annual consumed tonnage. The growth in consumption has seen new retailers of LPG beyond petrol stations. Shops in fast growing urban residential areas started retailing gas in small stocks. These informal shops, which also carried other FMCG products, have driven convenience by combining their proximity to customers and ad hoc delivery arrangements with motorcycles as customers placed orders to them through their phones or Internet messaging platforms. Small kiosks also mirrored their FMCG goods retailing behaviour of offering informal credit to consumers whose gas ran out abruptly without the necessary cash flows to purchase it on cash. This simple model was the beginning of a tectonic changes in the Sh60 billion industry that would end with mixed results both to consumers and the big LPG brands. As the distribution model changed, the big brands stuck to their old distribution anchored on petrol stations, which were far from residents and most of them did not offer remote ordering and delivery services. The independent refillers saw a big opportunity to push the gas through the informal retailers sometimes even owning the gas cages that displayed cylinders at these shops. As these refillers kept growing, the absence of rules meant almost anyone could set up a refilling depot in their backyard. These informal refilling depots in pursuit of higher margins employed underhand tactics sometimes mixing up unsafe gases during refilling, posing grave dangers to customers. Worse of all, they started to manufacture sub-standard cylinders as counterfeits of the known brands. These cylinders, made from cheap materials, would aggravate the safety situation resulting in numerous explosions in multiple households across the country. Last year, industry regulator Energy and Petroleum Regulatory Authority(Epra) brought new rules in the game. The exchange pool which was mandatory was removed and made voluntary. Licences were also introduced for retailers, transporters and cylinder brand owners. Compliance with these licences comes with a hefty price while non-compliance comes with hefty fines. For a period of time, cylinder brand owners slept at night when they started to recover their cylinders. However, since Covid lockdowns illegal refillers have had a field day continuing to refill cylinders that they don’t own. A World Bank study in 2016 found that every time customers of LPG are situated more than 10 km away from a distribution point, over 50 percent switch to a different fuel. For the customers in Nairobi, the nearest point of sale is usually the informal shop outside their apartment. So, they immediately go to the vendor for exchange in lieu of their proximity, convenient delivery or the fact that they offer informal credit to the gas refilling customer. This paints a grim picture to the cylinder owners, the regulators and the consumers themselves. Unless the brand owners re-engineer their distribution model by driving convenience through home delivery or working with local shops, it will be nearly impossible to escape these turbulent waters. This convenience will need to be combined with a level of consumer financing and simple point of sale technologies that can easily be used by the local shops to record sales while tracking and tracing the exchanged cylinders. This technology not only enable consumers to check the legitimacy of their cylinders but also help the informal shops to obtain stock financing through lending partners. The growth of digital channels offers them a golden opportunity to connect to their customers at scale while fighting counterfeits. A new digitally enabled distribution model will be the real game changer. Mr  Ndiang'ui is the CEO and co-founder of Gobeba, a digital commerce-enabled LPD distribution firm.