I often receive feedback from readers on my column, with some disagreeing with my arguments and others amplifying my message. These are usually very welcome as it demonstrates that people are engaging with the ideas being expressed. There is a third category which is even more important. These are people who draw my attention to issues that require to be brought to the public space for discourse. For a weekly columnist, being able to have ideas to share every week is no mean feat. Many a times the deadline for filing the column arrives before you have clarity of thought on what issue to engage on. This article is based on such nudging by a reader. His request to me was described in the context of university student welfare and higher education funding. At that time, since I am a member of a university, I quipped hat yes that is a challenge but maybe not a top priority for my engagement currently. Sometimes when you observe a problem every day it can numb you to inaction. However, two days after his initial email to me, mainstream media carried stories of university student complaining about delayed Higher Education Loans Board (HELB) remittance coupled with the Covid pandemic rendering the majority of students unable to meet their basic needs of food, shelter, and clothing. The stark reality is that the country is going through hard economic times. This has put a strain on most operations of government. The tendency in the past few years has been for the government to transfer this problem to individuals, whether asking parents to buy learning materials items for their children, and schools taking responsibility for housing extra students admitted because of the 100 percent transition policy, amongst other things. But the challenge is you cannot run an entire country based on private enterprise and contributions. When the Higher Education Loans Board was introduced, the problem was inability of parents and their children to afford university education. Public funding of university education was underscored as an important national undertaking. When you see students complaining about delays or not being able to access loans, there is a fundamental policy issue that needs to be addressed. When students complain about not accessing the money, the implications are that they cannot pay for their hostels and buy food and other necessities so that they focus on their university education. The larger question must therefore be about what the government policy for dealing with this problem is. More fundamentally, is the question of university funding. For quite sometime now, most of the old and big universities have been and continue to reel under financial challenges. The capitation they receive from the government has been decreasing year in year out, partly due to the increase in the number of universities that require to be funded from public coffers and reduced government revenues. As a result, meeting the statutory obligations and running basic operations for these institutions are a challenge. Payment of salaries on time, for those who do, is something to be celebrated by staff and not taken as a given. A few months ago, the media carried reports of those universities that owed money to staff pensions, had not remitted loan deductions that staff owed banks and other financial institutions. Neither had they remitted tax to the Kenya Revenue Authority. The problem, however, arises from the law’s assignment of tax obligation on the employee. Even when the employer has deducted the sum but not remitted it, the KRA still holds the employee responsible. When one goes for a tax clearance certificate in such instances, they cannot obtain it due to no fault of their own. This is something that Parliament must address to ensure that innocent employees do not suffer for mistakes that are not of their own making. On a larger scale, it is time for government to relook the university funding model and address the perennial underfunding and resultant financial crisis that many of them are facing.