WPP Scangroup CEO Bharat Thakrar. FILE PHOTO | NMG The WPP-Scangroup PLC recently announced the suspension of its CEO Bharat Thakrar and chief financial officer Satyabrata Das. In a statement released by the Scangroup, the two officials were suspended by the WPP board of directors to allow an investigation into claims of gross misconduct and possible offences in their capacity as senior executives and employees of the company. Following the suspension, the board delegated authority to an interim chief operating officer, Alec Graham, to ensure continued management. The board’s statement implies its concerns that the duo might have taken advantage of their privileged positions to carry out the alleged misconduct, which goes against the ethics and corporate governance of running a business. Much has been written about the roles of boards in setting an example through the ethical values of an organisation. A board is responsible for determining and communicating the values and standards of the business, as well as to ensure that the policies, procedures, and controls in place act to embed the ethical values throughout the business. But can board members demonstrate that they are committed to ethical standards and their application to the way they govern and conduct themselves? CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY Corporate governance is concerned with holding the balance between social and economic goals and between individual and communal goals. The governance framework is there to encourage the efficient use of resources and accountability for the stewardship of those resources. There is a growing feeling that businesses not only have responsibilities to the community but also that corporate managers who control the businesses should voluntarily and without waiting for legal compulsion, manage it in such a way as to fulfil these responsibilities. The critical question then is what the statutory statement says about the interests which the directors should promote when exercising their discretionary powers. The common law mantra that the duties of directors are owed to the company has long obscured the answer to this question. This is because the company, as an artificial person, can have no interests separate from the interests of those who are associated with it. So, the crucial question is, when we refer to the company, to the interests of which of those sets of natural persons are we referring? THE MOMENT OF TRUTH The litmus test for people’s behaviour is the decisions they take at the moments that matter when they have a choice between doing the right thing or not, and when there is probably nobody watching to compel them to do it. In today’s environment where stakeholders have high expectations that companies should be run in accordance with good corporate governance practices, it is the directors who bear the ultimate responsibility for the business. So if corporate governance lies at the very heart of the way businesses are run, ethical values must be part of what makes those hearts beat. This is because accountability and responsibility of business enterprise are constantly subject to question.Business transactions do not occur in isolation, but have wider social and economic consequences which need to be considered, impacting directly on employment, health, and the environment. Nevertheless, at the end of the day, society wants evidence that companies exist for more than simply generating profits, and expectations are for corporate governance principles to enhance confidence that companies act in the public interest. THE BEDROCK OF ANY SUCCESSFUL BUSINESS In an era when trust is at a premium and scrutiny from stakeholders is more intense, organisations need to behave per their core purpose and principles in order to protect reputation and trust. Corporate governance then becomes a vital mechanism through which boards can ensure that the behaviours of their workforce are aligned to the organisation’s purpose and principles — and that corporate goals and values are translated into their people’s decisions and actions. From setting the right "tone from the top" to maintaining and monitoring business controls — and from rewarding the right behaviours to communicating openly and transparently with all stakeholders — the board plays a pivotal role in all aspects of corporate governance. THE STARTING POINT It is the board’s role to apply the right risk lens to every decision and action. For this to be a success, organisations need to have the right people on the board — experienced and inquisitive and with the time to understand both the risk landscape and their legal and ethical responsibilities. While boards need to establish as much visibility and control as possible over all types of risks in business — financial, operational, strategic, and environmental risks — its role does not end there. The single-biggest risk to any organisation is the embedded culture and the behaviours of its workforce. The board must set the right tone from the top, aligned with its mandate, through its ethics, values, and behaviours. But this tone will come to nothing if it is not reflected at the bottom of the organisation and every level in between. No industry or country is immune to corporate scandals. While such issues certainly have an ethical dimension, they are also hard-wired to the very functioning of our economies. The purpose of corporate governance is precisely to create an environment of trust, transparency, and accountability necessary for obtaining long-term investment, financial stability, and sustainable growth. If nothing is done, the very fabric and foundation of doing business are effectively at risk. Mr Ndegwa is executive director /CEO, Kenya Institute of Management