Kenya Bureau of Standards (Kebs) Managing Director Bernard Njiraini. PHOTO | LUCY WANJIRU | NMG The Kenya Bureau of Standards (Kebs) has opened a business centre in Mombasa targeting small scale importers and exporters. More than 2,500 traders in Coast region who have been seeking Kebs services in Nairobi can now get the services in the new hub, known as Biashara Centre, which was opened last week. The centre’s primary aim is to make importation and exportation of cargo easier and cheaper. The opening of the centre comes as the Ministry of Industrialization, Trade and Enterprise Development in collaboration with Kebs moves to enhance efficiency and ease process of doing business in the country by eliminating logistical and administrative challenges caused to traders when they seek public services in multiple locations. "We recognize the significant role MSMEs will play in post Covid-19 economic recovery and the urgent need to address obstacles limiting growth of MSMEs in the country,” said Kebs managing director Benard Njiraini. “With the new Biashara Center, MSMEs can now access services from public institutions in the entrepreneurial ecosystem under one roof in a timely and effective manner," Last year, Kebs implemented an MSME policy which envisions “a vibrant sector sustainably producing high quality products accessible to local and global markets”. The policy introduced a raft of preferential benefits for small scale traders including graduated charges and favourable treatment in terms of services offered by Kebs. The graduated application of fees payable to Kebs will help meet the needs of start-ups and upcoming entrepreneurs including Jua Kali operators who have previously been paying applicable fees at the same rate as established corporates. Data estimates that Kenya's MSMEs contribute approximately 40 percent of the gross domestic products (GDP) with the majority falling in the informal sector. The new Biashara Centre housed at the Kebs Coast Region office is also a one-stop shop for essential business and trade services such as tax compliance registration, MSMEs loans and branding registration support. The centre will also provide training on production, product certification and systems accreditation. Other services to be provided at the centre include promoting, regulating, and developing MSMEs with the aim of boosting their growth. Government agencies already set up at the centre include the Kenya Accreditation Service (KENAS), Kenya Industrial Property Institute (KIPI), Kenya Industrial Estates (KIE), Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA), Numerical Machining Complex (NMC), Kenya Industrial and Development Institute (KIRDI), and Micro and Small Enterprises Authority (MSEA). The hub also houses modern testing and calibration facilities equipped with testing lab including Food and Agriculture, Microbiology, Partial Organic and Inorganic Chemistry, Instrumentation and Metrology that will offer testing and calibration services to the Coast region customers, as opposed to sending samples to Nairobi as was previously the case. "The offices and laboratories that offer testing services are fully accredited and compliant with ISO 17025 requirement for conformity assessment" added Mr Njiraini.