Dr Ahmed Kalebi (right), a pathologist and Lancet Kenya CEO with his team at the lab in Nairobi on April 22, 2020. PHOTO | SILA KIPLAGAT | NMG Pathologists Lancet Kenya (PLK) has announced the retirement of its founding partner and the group managing director Dr Ahmed Kalebi. In a newspaper advertisement, the board of directors also announced the appointment of Ms Mwende Musunga as the group CEO, who will be joining Lancet Group of Laboratories East Africa from June 1. Ms Musunga has been Laborex Kenya Ltd chief executive for the past four years. Dr Kalebi, who founded PLK in 2009 before it was acquired by French and South African partners, announced early this month that he would be proceeding on retirement on April 30. He indicated that he would not be renewing his contract as consultant pathologist for the East Africa region and through his lawyer, sought a severance pay and preferred shares amounting to Sh1.9 billion from his partners. The board said Dr Kalebi will remain as a shareholder at PLK and its subsidiaries in East Africa. “Dr Kalebi is proceeding on a planned voluntary retirement, to dedicate more time to his family and pursue various personal interests,” the notice stated. From a humble beginning in 2009, Dr Kalebi helped grow a network of more than 100 laboratories in 11 African countries including Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, Botswana, Ghana, Mozambique, Nigeria, Swaziland, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Dr Kalebi, a pathologist, set up Lancet Kenya as an offshoot of its parent company in South Africa. The company operated under Pathologist Lancet Kenya (PLK) and Lancet Services Company (LSC). In 2019, France-based multinational Cerba Healthcare bought shares in South Africa’s Lancet Laboratories for an undisclosed amount in a deal that saw it take control of the East African unit headed by Dr Kalebi. Lancet SA holds a 49 per cent stake in the joint venture while Cerba Healthcare has 51 per cent. Dr Kalebi had informed his partners of his intention to quit the firm on April 30 when his employment contract as East Africa CEO and chief consultant pathologist expires. “The current term under the aforementioned employment contract is set to lapse on 30th April 2021 and our client does not wish to apply for a new term,” said a letter sent to the firm by Dr Kalebi’s lawyer, Donald Kipkorir. His lawyer disclosed that his total claim under the employment contract and under shareholder agreement is Sh1,851,879,151.75. Dr Kalebi currently owns 7.67 per cent of PLK and 10 per cent of LSC, according to Mr Kipkorir’s letter. He was on a monthly pay of Sh1.76 million. In the payout deal, Dr Kalebi is seeking overtime accrued from May 2009 to April 2021 amounting to Sh473,523,080; bonus pay for 11 years of service of Sh54.7 million; gratuity pay of Sh14.5 million and a golden parachute or exit package of Sh100 million. The amount adds up to Sh660 million of employment claims alone. “Our client wants his shares in PLK and LSC to be converted into preferred shares and free from any dilution without our client’s consent,” his lawyer Mr Kipkorir said. In the notice on Tuesday, PLK also announced that Mr Matthieu Gogue had been appointed as the transition group managing director for six months while Dr Charles Wahome was appointed the incoming chief consultant. Dr Wahome has been working at the firm since 2016, serving as Dr Kalebi’s deputy.