National Treasury building. FILE PHOTO | NMG Final designs of the first dual carriage road in Meru are ready and the government is currently sourcing funding for the Sh12 billion project, the Kenya National Highways Authority (KeNHA) has said. The authority's Upper Eastern Regional manager Sheikh Takoy said property owners along the 13.8 kilometre corridor who will be affected by the project had already been identified and notified. “Valuation of properties has been completed. We are waiting for funds to kick-start the project,” he said in an interview. Mr Takoy did not disclose how much money would be spent on compensation, only saying details would be announced in due course. Construction of the dual carriage will see demolition of several high value buildings along the route, with Mr Takoy assuring affected property owners that they would be compensated in accordance with the law. Mr John Maingi, a resident, said he had participated in public sensitisation and was convinced the project would transform the town. “We are eagerly waiting for the road to be constructed because we are tired of traffic jams in the town,” he said. The road cuts through Meru town from Gikumene, three kilometres from the town along the Meru-Embu road to Gitoro Conference Centre near Meru National Polytechnic along Meru-Nanyuki road. The project also includes a four-kilometre section from Makutano to Ruiri junction on Meru-Maua road. Leaders in Meru have said they will push the government to source funds for the project which has potential to transform the fast-growing town. Dualling of the road is expected to improve traffic movement in a town logistics experts predict will become a transport hub in the upper eastern region, given its strategic location between Nairobi and Isiolo where a resort city will be built in the Sh2.5 trillion Lamu Port South Sudan Ethiopia Transport corridor project. The dual carriage will also have pedestrians walkways as well as foot bridges, said Charles Njogu, KeNHA assistant director corporate communications. It will connect both the eastern and western bypasses which originate at Gikumene and have been built by the Kenya Urban Roads Authority’s at a cost of Sh3 billion. The 8.8-kilometre western bypass links motorists to the Meru-Nanyuki road at Gitoro while those travelling to Maua and the National Park take the 12.6-kilometre eastern bypass, linking the Maua-Meru road at Kaaga Girls high school.