Treasury Principal Secretary Julius Muia. FILE PHOTO | NMG The Treasury’s proposal to introduce a wealth tax on the high net worth individuals and high earners could go a long way in resolving the perennial shortfalls in tax collections that have afflicted the exchequer. It is an open secret that Kenya’s tax system has not been the most equitable, with a large proportion of taxes coming from the easy-to-tax salaried class and consumption taxes that are levied at source. Over the years, successive Treasury chiefs have lamented the fact that many wealthy Kenyans are paying only a fraction of the tax that would ideally emanate from the size of their earnings, pointing to rampant tax avoidance. We hold the view that the wealthy have a moral obligation to pay their fair share of tax in an economy that has equally given them much to enjoy. Developed countries already have in place a higher top tax rate for the wealthy, including the UK and France (45 percent) and the US (37 percent). In Kenya the top tax rate of 30 percent kicks in for everyone at income above just Sh32,334. Indeed, last July, a group of 83 of the world’s wealthiest persons wrote a letter asking governments to permanently increase taxes on people like themselves in order to fund the post-Covid-19 recovery efforts. Here in Kenya, the Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) recently said it had identified wealthy individuals and companies from whom it could collect up to Sh250 billion worth of unpaid taxes, following a directive by the President to keep an eye on wealthy individuals whose lifestyles do not match the taxes they pay. Given that the country’s tax collection deficit stood at Sh109.9 billion in the first six months of the fiscal year, ramping up collections from this group would go a long way in plugging this gap. Given the failure of past efforts to increase the top tax rate, the Treasury must now ensure that it puts up a better case before Parliament for approval. The government must also carry out proper public sensitisation on the need for the higher tax for the wealthy. It needs to get a buy-in from the majority who can then impress upon their leaders to pass the measures.