Health Cabinet Secretary Mutahi Kagwe (centre) briefs media on the rollout of the Covid-19 vaccine to counties outside the offices of the Council of Governors on March 10, 2021. NMG PHOTO Plans to allow private hospitals to import the coronavirus vaccines will help speed up efforts to achieve herd immunity and stop the rising deaths. But they shouldn’t distract from the need for equity in access to the paid-for vaccines and to prioritise vulnerable Kenyans for inoculation. Beginning of this month, Kenya received 1.02 million doses of the AstraZeneca-Oxford Covid-19 vaccine. This is enough to cater to more than 500,000 people requiring two doses eight to 12 weeks apart. About three weeks into the vaccination exercise, less than 40,000 health workers, teachers, and security personnel have received their first shots. The government hopes to have 16 million people inoculated over the next two years — with priority being given to health workers, the elderly, and the vulnerable — but the process is very slow. Many well-to-do members of society are likely to miss out yet they can afford to pay for the vaccines if they were available. People have voiced concerns about the speed with which the vaccines are being administered. Those with the ability to pay would avoid the long wait for the public vaccination if they had the option to buy from private hospitals. The world is racing to tame a pandemic that has killed almost three million people hence there should be options for private hospitals to charge a “minimum surcharge” to those who can afford it to broaden inoculation coverage. Nearly 2,000 Kenyans have died of Covid-19, and the country is battling a third wave. If the pharmaceutical giants behind the sought-after jabs allow the sale to the private sector, hospitals should not leave the poor people behind. They should source the vaccines cheaply from Covax— which aims to deliver two billion doses to poor countries and price them fairly. Kenya is offering the Covid-19 vaccine free of charge to its citizens at $7.70 (Sh845.80) per shot as negotiated under the Covax facility. The private sector should know that a vaccine is a public good. There will be a huge demand for the vaccine when they reach private hospitals. It should not be an opportunity to make profits and introduce counterfeits.