An aerial view of Nairobi City Hall. FILE PHOTO | NMG City Hall has extended free pre-primary education programme for all learners in the county government’s Early Childhood Development Education (ECDE) centres. This is after Nairobi County committed Sh80 million towards the programme which will now see more than 25,000 pre-primary school learners in Nairobi continue enjoying free learning in the 232 ECDE centers. The new development will see Nairobi County government commit Sh3,200 for each child and Sh3,300 for those with special needs.  City Hall abolished all levies for pupils in the ECDE centres three years ago heralding free pre-primary education in the county. This saw enrolment in the ECDE centres increase significantly from 13,000 to over 25,000. Deputy Governor Ann Kananu said the county government will continue investing in pre-primary education in the capital with the aim of doubling the number of children enrolled in ECDEs in Nairobi to 50,000 by 2022. To support the expected surge in enrolment, the county government has set aside Sh116 million for the financial year 2021/2022 for building of new classrooms and construction of more schools in order to reach out to as many children as possible. Ms Kananu added that the county government is also in the process of recruiting additional 520 ECDE teachers and later adopt a continual replacement for those who leave the service through natural attrition. “This launch of free ECDE Fund Program could not be timelier especially after the unprecedented closure of schools and subsequent re-opening with comprehensive measures to contain the Covi-19 pandemic,” said Ms Kananu. “These funds will go a long way in improving the physical facilities of our schools hence ensuring access and quality of education in our public ECDEs,” she added. The Constitution stipulates that basic education (ECDE included) is free and compulsory while the Education Act 2013 mandates respective county governments to implement the right of every child to free and compulsory pre-school education.