Former Murang'a Senator Kembi Gitura. He was the Kemsa board chairman at the time of the scandal. MPs have criticised President Uhuru Kenyatta’s decision to move Kenya Medical Supplies Authority (Kemsa) board chairman Kembi Gitura to the communications regulator amid an ongoing investigation into the Sh7.8 billion Covid-19 procurement scandal. The National Assembly’s Public Investments Committee (PIC) accused Mr Kenyatta of disregarding Parliament and warned it will consider recommending that Mr Gitura be barred from holding public office if found culpable. President Kenyatta moved Mr Gitura from Kemsa to chair the Communications Authority of Kenya (CA) board, where he will serve for three years with effect from April 18, 2021. “The right way is to make recommendations to say that the officer (Mr Gitura) is not fit to hold public office. It is frustrating to us and Kenyans to see what has happened with that appointment. We will make our recommendations,” PIC chairman Abdulswamad Nassir said. He added that Mr Gitura will be recalled to testify before the committee after being mentioned adversely. “The board said they were not aware of what was happening when the management was procuring Covid-19 related items. “But Kemsa chief executive Jonah Manjari said when all this procurement was happening, the board would be sitting there and having tea. Mr Manjari himself confirmed here that some commitment letters was being picked when the chair was there. We will have to hear from Mr Gitura. He has a right of reply,” Mr Nassir said. Suspended Kenya Kemsa chief executive said some of the commitment letters that bloated the budget for procurement of Covid-19 related items were signed in the presence of Mr Gitura. Mr Gitura, however, maintains that no money was lost but went ahead and suspended Mr Manjari, Director of Procurement Charles Juma and Commercial Director Edward Mureithi. While appearing before MPs, Mr Manjari claimed that some board members influenced the award of the Sh7.6 billion Covid-19 related tenders.