Economic independence and stability of many countries, Kenya included, is heavily reliant on resources mobilised through tax payment. Such revenues are the cog that keeps the economic wheel rolling. However, tax crimes and related malpractices have continued to dent collection efforts thereby occasioning substantial loss of government revenue. Such malpractices are both a global and regional menace. A report titled The Africa Initiative titled Tax Transparency in Africa 2020, for instance, estimates that the continent suffers revenue loss of between $40 billion to $80 billion every year to evasion alone. This amount can comfortably fund key projects in most African countries. Such worrying statistics are the reason authorities are working to clip the tentacles of the tax malpractices dragon from spreading any further. An approach adopted by the Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) is multifaceted and ranges from automation of processes to leverage on intelligence gathering and management. Although automation is key to reducing human intervention, a major breeding ground for malpractices, intelligence gathering and management is a big booster that complements it. A major setback to this process is unwillingness by various stakeholders to volunteer information to relevant authorities for action. Failure by wananchi to report tax evasion, corruption and other malpractices to the authorities has been a concern. According to a survey conducted in 2019 and published in 2020 by the Transparency International Kenya, a majority of Kenyans do not report corruption cases to relevant authorities. The survey titled Kenya Bribery Index 2019, reports that 87 percent of respondents sampled in 2019 never reported corruption incidents. However, compared to a similar survey conducted in 2017 where 94 percent of the respondents noted that they never reported corruption cases to authorities, the 2019 survey points to a slight improvement. While there are respondents who felt that no action would be taken even if they reported the cases, others opted not to report for fear of intimidation. It is for this reason that KRA has enhanced its intelligence gathering and management function to allow for 100 percent anonymous reporting of malpractices. This has been effected through establishment of an anonymous online reporting channel for such cases called the iWhistle (www.kra.go.ke). The platform exists under the whistle-blower framework, which was implemented to encourage members of the public to volunteer information on malpractices. In addition to reporting tax evasion, which sabotages administration, the general public can report the following to KRA through the platform: bribery, fraud, conflict of interest, abuse of office, concealment, diversion of cargo and any other practice that may sabotage KRA’s revenue collection efforts. The first step on board iWhistle entails account setup where the system generates unique anonymous login credentials for a user. After successfully setting up the account, whistle-blowers can then report cases to KRA for action. After verification of the data received, KRA sends updates of the proceedings to the whistle-blower. An important aspect to note about iWhistle is that there is no one point where the whistle-blower is required to provide identify when engaging with KRA on this platform. The framework is complemented by a reward system where the authority appreciates whistle-blowers who volunteer information that results in recovery of revenues. The scheme provides for a reward of whichever is lower between five percent of the recovered tax or Sh2 million. Policy changes are, however, underway for an upward review of the lowest amount from the current Sh2 million. For whistle-blowers seeking a reward for information shared, a slightly different framework is followed to obtain personal data for purposes of processing the reward. Nonetheless, KRA maintains their identification details in confidence. Just like security which starts with an individual, so does ending all forms of tax malpractices. In the true spirit of patriotism therefore, wananchi should make use of the systems in place such as the iWhistle to report malpractices for the appropriate action to be taken. The writer is the commissioner for intelligence and strategic operations at Kenya Revenue Authority