“Is it true that one can have perfect photographic memory or is all fantasy? I have a friend who brags about having photographic memory but I can’t figure out how she achieves that…rather is her brain special?” *** This is a simple question and it is true to say that your friend is, in most probability taking you for a ride. The truth is that other than in some children, eidetic or photographic memory has not been shown to exist in scientific experiments and is mostly a figment of the imagination of lay people. That said, it is important to point out that different people have different capacities to remember things and it is true that some are better at recalling things than others (just like some people are taller than others). In a similar vein, some people are better athletes than others who might be good at football or some other human activity. In brief, people are born with different abilities and potential. To complicate things a little, not only is one born with different abilities, the environment in which one is born might assist or hinder development of characteristics. A well-known example is found in golf, where Tiger Woods was exposed to the sport from a young age and also seemed to have natural talent. Kenyan long-distance athletes continue to dominate the world on account of natural talent as well as early exposure. Another example is to be found in medicine where a person born of parents with diabetes can either reduce the chances of getting the full blown disease by proper diet and exersise or increase them by bad eating habits, leading to being overweight and lacking exercise. Just to complicate matters even further, a ‘decision’ to exercise or not might itself be in your genes and not a simple matter of the presence or absence of willpower. Life gets to be more complicated when one looks at other human conditions such as obesity and alcoholism, which for many years have been seen as conditions of people who make poor lifestyle choices. This is simply not the case. Taking obesity first, it is now clear that people with extreme obesity lack a hormone (leptine) that is released in the body when one has eaten enough food. It is as though obese people lack the ‘stomach switch for off’ when enough food has been eaten. In the absence of this switch, the person continues to eat more than he needs to thereby getting obese. Indeed there are now anti-obesity drugs that were developed on this understanding of releasing this hormone. For many years, people with alcoholism have been ostracised by parents, churches and communities because they have been seen as lesser beings that have made poor choices in life. Parents and others who love and care for these people express shock and surprise when days and months of prayer and fasting do not seem to resolve the problems with alcohol and drugs. The reality is that in many (not all), biological factors are at play not simply social factors such as peer pressure. This one point has caused much distress to parents who ask why one of their children born of the same father and mother and brought up in the same home turn out to have such different life trajectories. One abuses drugs and the other does not. Face blindness (Prosopagnosia) is a condition in which one is the opposite of your friend in that they are unable to recognise peoples’ faces. Everybody is a stranger at all times! Coming back to your memory question, you and your friend will have differing capacities to remember (as conferred to you by nature). This, however, is only part of the story. Many other factors will influence whether you remember or not. If it’s a subject, you are interested in and is presented to you in a manner that appeals to you then chances of remembering are better than a boring subject that is presented badly. If you are tired, or have consumed alcohol or sedating drugs, then memory storage is poor. As you know, increasing age is poor for memory as Alzheimer’s disease and other diseases of memory become more common with advancing age. Memory can also come with its own problems. In the condition called Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), the memory of the traumatic events keeps coming to consciousness against your will. If, for example, the trauma was a fatal car accident, then the memory of the actual crash together with the noises and screams of the dying keep coming to consciousness against all attempts to ‘forget’ the scene. Simply and finally put, your friend’s claims are without scientific merit but she has enabled us look at the complex nature of the subject of memory in daily life.