Following the basic needs logic, furniture and home improvement, in general, is what you would least expect people to spend their disposable income, especially during a pandemic. But many furniture brands have fared well over the last 12 months, seeing increased demand as more people used their time at home to refurbish their personal spaces. The combination of stay-at-home directives in most countries, and the increase in employees working from home, has generated exceptionally high demand for home office pieces. Prospective homeowners have also used the time to brush up on their plans for their dream homes or complete ongoing projects. There is now more opportunity in buying distressed properties, renovating and turning them around instead. In the luxury category, travel restrictions have meant that more and more clients are looking to local showrooms to provide solutions. That said, the commercial and tourism sectors have suffered major setbacks. Projects were put on hold while clients assessed the new normal and the future of the office space. This has led to more creative thinking in planning office spaces for meetings, to create a community feel for when employees check-in at the office. Some luxury tourism properties have also used this time to re-invent and upgrade their spaces and offer more niche personalised services to their clients. Lockdowns and travel restrictions also imposed several shocks to the supply chain. Interacting with like-minded people helps you to test how new technologies can be adapted for your business, gain new business leads, and expand your networks. In a nutshell, bouncing ideas in a non-judgement environment. As a member of the Entreprenuers’ Organisation Kenya Chapter, during the lockdown, I attended virtual learning events. The lessons I learned are what I have used to adapt my business model, create new service offerings, and even expanded my business to take advantage of several opportunities available. The initial lockdowns were the most severe with full closures across multiple industries. Global logistics and shipping lines saw delays and vessel shortages, respectively. At The Design Gallery, we dealt with this challenge by being constantly in touch with suppliers and customers. Now, most manufacturing activities have since recovered and are ramping up to pre-Covid-19 levels, enabling on-time project fulfilment. But the impact of the pandemic has increased the pace with which our industry is going digital. Leveraging video conferencing, screen sharing, and presentations, has enabled the furniture and home interior sector to collaborate with clients and suppliers and created cost savings. Of course, there are still those clients who prefer face-to-face contact and where they can physically touch the products they are considering purchasing. For them, showrooms have instituted strict Covid-19 protocols while retaining the same level of service. Going digital helped us to expand and to cost-effectively serve clients in the UAE, UK, and South Africa. We have also been able to communicate more effectively and efficiently with our suppliers. We have found that we do not need to travel as much to our suppliers.