Wanjala sat in his regular Wednesday morning department meeting of fellow accountants at the auditing firm. The partner went over schedules for the next seven days and various pain points experienced by the team regarding their clients and then brainstormed possible solutions. Sally and Robert also sat in this meeting but looked perplexed. Afterwards, Wanjala heard “psst…..psst…..please come here and explain what just happened”. Robert told Wanjala that he did not understand why the pain points discussed in the meeting were actually problems. Then Sally chimed in that she did not comprehend two of the solutions brainstormed. They wanted Wanjala to explain it all. Instead of calmly explaining to the duo what had transpired and why, he got annoyed because these two frequently did not follow, grasp, or comprehend dealings. When Wanjala first joined the team, he thought Sally and Robert were just lazy or did not pay attention. But over time he noticed that the issue was not laziness or sleeping in meetings but something deeper. Even in one-on-one explanations, the two struggled to grasp concepts. They did well in mundane repetitive tasks, but never in creative responsibilities with innovative solutions. So, Sally and Robert frequently turned to their colleagues to understand things while hiding from the auditing firm partners the extent of their confusion. Like Wanjala, you might have some colleagues who just do not measure up with their cognitive ability. As examples, do you have a colleague who does not quite catch on to concepts that you feel are obvious? Do you notice someone on a committee who is repeatedly the last person to fathom ideas and strategies? Know a co-worker who takes much longer on complicated tasks but without higher quality that could justify their extra time spent? We like to think of an ideal egalitarian society where hard work can attain equal results for all people. But the sad reality subsides in that some people are naturally smarter than others. One’s intelligence level stands as a key determinant, but often an under-discussed component, of an employee’s success. Jeanne Ormrod defines intelligence as the ability of someone to alter and amend their behaviour so that they can undertake new duties effectively. But is it fair to judge workers on something they cannot control? Sadly, some companies around the world and right here in Kenya require written intelligence tests before a prospective employee is offered a job post. But by taking practice tests many times, one can start to score better not because one becomes smarter, but because they become familiar with the test formats. Business Daily readers could look online for Mike Bryon’s excellent book containing psychometric tests such that readers can test friends, family, and colleagues on their intelligence levels if they are willing or work to improve their own intelligence scores by format familiarity. But where does intelligence come from? Researcher Naomi Friedman and her team highlight the disturbing fact that most of intelligence is inherited through someone’s genetics. On average, research shows between 40 percent and 99 percent of intelligence comes from DNA. But what about the other portion of intelligence? How a child is raised and experiences in one’s formative years comprise the other building blocks of intelligence. The notion of intelligence has fascinated psychologists and business executives for the past 152 years. Frances Galton back in 1869 posed the first theories of intelligence which have evolved over the decades. Many popular books, though, espouse unproven or even disproven concepts of multiple intelligences and ways to boost general intelligence. But as adults, we cannot improve our general intelligence. We can only improve our knowledge, understanding, experiences and what Adam Grant calls cognitive flexibility. Boris Forthmann, Anne Gerwig, Heinz Holling, Pınar Çelik, Martin Storme, and Todd Lubart show the power that divergent thinking for creativity and solutions through object exercises can boost your creativity even as an adult. On a regular basis, spend three to five minutes on object exercises. Close your eyes, spin around in a circle a few times, then open your eyes. The first object that your eyes randomly fall upon, then come up with as many uses as possible. As an example, here in this author’s office at USIU-Africa, just spinning around and opening my own eyes, I see a whiteboard marker pen. What uses could I come up with the pen? Well, the most common use for a whiteboard marker pen is to write on glass or whiteboard surfaces. But uncommon uses can include a door stopper, holding toothpicks in the top, scratching one’s back, and throwing at someone. As you do these object exercises regularly, you will notice your brain shifts from convergent thinking to divergent thinking. You will notice solutions generated in your mind instead of complaining about problems that occur in your workplace and community around you. In summary, realise the sources of intelligence and notice it in your colleagues around you. Take time to improve your creative thinking through object exercises. Dr Scott may be reached on scott@ScottProfessor.com or on Twitter: @ScottProfessor