Education CS George Magoha. FILE PHOTO | NMG When  the Covid-19 pandemic struck Kenya, one of the first sectors to be distracted was education. Schools, colleges and universities were immediately ordered to be closed. Thereafter the education calendar was thrown into disarray. Efforts by the government to develop a new calendar for resumption of learning in 2020 were unsuccessful. The frustration with this was voiced by parents many times, leading to complaints that Prof  George Magoha, the Cabinet Secretary for Education, was playing with the future of children by failing to be decisive. The President in his regular address to the nation on the pandemic directed the Cabinet Secretary to come up with a calendar. The government initially indicated that 2020 would be a lost year as far as education in the country was concerned. It was thus a sigh of relief when pupils in Class Eight, Form Four and Class Four were asked to go back late in 2020. However, the initial hope that they would be joined by the rest of the pupils soon dissipated soon due to rising Covid numbers. However, at the start of this year government invited all pupils back to school. To ensure that schools recover the period that was interrupted due to the pandemic, a new calendar with reduced timelines and a shorter break was put in place by the Cabinet Secretary in consultation with education sector stakeholders. Prof Magoha deserves commendation for several reasons. First, despite the huge numbers of pupils and teachers in learning institutions across the country, the school term ended without too many cases of Covid infections, hospitalisations or deaths. Secondly, there has been calm, meaning that the Ministry of Education must have consulted stakeholders adequately before putting in place measures on resumption of classes. It demonstrates that if properly undertaken, public participation as constitutionally demanded leads to improved governance. Kudos to the ministry and its team of officials for the successful completion of the KCPE exams on March 24. The exam  results will provide a more comprehensive framework for assessing performance. However, the fact that the process went on smoothly across the country is indicative of the hard work that the ministry put in. The Cabinet Secretary’s experience as past chairman of the Kenya National Examinations Council (Knec) must also have helped since there was little reported about hiccups. His performance confirms that with proper planning it is possible to overcome any obstacle in the quest for delivering public services. Unfortunately, way too often public policy is implemented without much thought and prior planning. Consequently, when obstacles arise, it is impossible to address them satisfactorily. The consequence is normally chaos and public dissatisfaction and anger. Secondly, many public servants are preoccupied with what they can get for personal enrichment and not public service. They end up doing assignments assigned to them half-heatedly as a result. Even as we congratulate him it is not time to exhale yet. It is important that he finds time to also look at the implementation of the competency-based curriculum (CBC). Speaking to several parents, there is a feeling that the system has turned them into pupils. I remember having a conversation with a parent who travelled out of town on a Friday only to receive a message through their class WhatsApp group that their children who were in Class Eight would be having their next assessment paper on Saturday. If you that the only problem for this parent was how to organise transport to and from school on a weekend at notice, wait for the next issue. The children were required to go to school with loamy soil and other paraphernalia. How to deliver this when one is out of town is baffling. Yet this has been the experience of many parents with CBC. Many a times my son has come home in the evening with a request that we should print some photos for him to go with the next day to school. Officially every parent with a child in CBC is required to have a printer at home. It is made worse by the fact that the children take the word of the teacher as gospel truth.