AFP PHOTO In the wake of the new age of capitalism, multinational corporations seem to have a widespread influence through their subsidiaries on our economic, political and social lives across the globe. Many large businesses with substantial operations across borders are commonly structured to have a parent company with a network of subsidiaries. From a commercial perspective, this practice is quite prevalent that it is unusual to question or ask why large enterprises conduct their businesses in this manner. In principle, a subsidiary is a distinct entity from its parent company, with a separate board of directors responsible for its management and affairs, thus insulated from the liabilities of its subsidiaries. However, the UK Supreme Court recently handed down a landmark decision demonstrating that a parent company of a multinational can be held liable for the acts or omissions of its subsidiaries. The decision in point involved the Royal Dutch Shell Plc (RDS)– a UK domiciled parent company of the multinational Shell Group of Companies. In this case, a group of fishermen in River State, Nigeria were allowed to bring claims against RDS for the acts of its subsidiary - Shell Petroleum Development Company (SPDC). The claims involved incidents of oil spillage, widespread environmental degradation, water and ground contamination in River State, Nigeria. They argued that RDS, the parent company owed them a duty of care since it exercised significant control over the material aspects of its subsidiary operations in Nigeria, thus ultimately assuming responsibility. In reaching its findings, the supreme court considered the extent of control and management of a subsidiary by the parent company. From the decision, one cannot help but discern the interesting legal interplay of corporate governance and organisational structure of parent companies and their effects on subsidiaries. Principally, from a corporate governance perspective, where a parent company has a network of subsidiaries, then the board of directors of each subsidiary should generally act in the best interest of their respective subsidiary, and exercise unfettered independence of mind as opposed to the interests of the group or the parent company as a whole. The supreme court was tasked to consider whether the Nigerian community had an arguable case against RDC as the parent company over the acts or omissions of SPDC. In applying its mind, the court considered the extent of control the parent company had over the internal affairs and management of its subsidiary. Accordingly, it looked into the organisational structure of the parent company and how it took over, intervened in, controlled, supervised, or engaged in the management affairs of its subsidiary's board. And this sums up the corporate governance interplay mentioned above. Therefore, where a parent company has direct, practical and significant control over its subsidiary's management, then the parent company can be held liable for the acts of its subsidiary based on its proximate relationship. However, for incidents where a parent company only establishes general policies and standards that its subsidiaries need to conform to, then this cannot be interpreted to mean that the parent company has taken control of the operations of its subsidiary. In the Royal Dutch Case, the RDS corporate and organisational governance structure showed that RDC had practical means of asserting executive power from the centre of the group to control at least some aspects of the management of SPDC. In particular, RDS had the power to review the global standards implemented in Nigeria by SPDC, as deemed necessary, and impose operational measures according to its wishes concerning SPDC's management of the pipeline facilities and the risk of oil spills. Additionally, SPDC was required to report to RDS key performance indicators monthly, including assets maintenance, safety and the environment, and detailed budget plans annually. Further, the RDS control framework and corporate governance structure showed that its CEO had a wide-range of responsibilities and influence over its subsidiaries to the extent that it would be perceived that RDS carried on the internal businesses of its subsidiaries as if they were a single commercial undertaking, with boundaries of legal personality and ownership within the group becoming irrelevant. In establishing proximity to the claims raised, the final nail on the coffin was that the Executive Vice Presidents and Vice Presidents who managed certain regions in Sub-Saharan Africa derived their organisational authority from RDS. This clearly showed that RDS had direct supervisory and executive authority over the internal affairs and management of SPDC. Arguably, it is expected that the activities of a corporate group should be coordinated from a central point, however,the parent company should restraint itself from the temptations of micromanaging its subsidiaries lest liability may be apportioned to it either based on the common law principle of duty of care (as observed in this case) or by piercingthe corporate veil.