President Uhuru Kenyatta. FILE PHOTO | NMG As President Uhuru Kenyatta makes the weighty decision on whether to ease Covid-19 health restrictions today, there are a few things that he should consider. According to a poll of corporate managers released earlier this month, key sectors such as manufacturing, services and agriculture are barely keeping their heads above the murky economic waters. Performance of these sectors slowed down to an eight-month low as managers interviewed reported a drop in new orders. Apparently, most households have little disposable income. Under such circumstances, the companies have sustained pay cuts for the fourth month in a row in a strategy that maintains their employee numbers in the hope of an uptick in the coming months. The President’s decision today will determine the pace of business in these sectors which employ most workers. It holds the potential to reverse the business performance slowdown or trigger the next round of mass layoffs. While imposing further restrictive measures may look popular in the face of the increased positivity rate in recent days, the President must resist the urge to act on impulse. He needs only look back to last year when he ordered stricter measures that brought the economy on its knees. Sure, the positivity rate reduced, but the economic pain the measures inflicted on most families were unquantifiable. Essentially, in making the decision, the President should strike a balance between the need to slow down the spread of the pandemic and ensuring that the economic heart keeps beating enough to spur more business recovery. Of what use would stricter Covid measures be to Kenyans if they would render more households into misery? It also bears stressing that the weakest link in the war against this pandemic is not lack of strict guidelines, but rather their enforcement. Besides extending the Covid-19 health restrictions in December, the President announced the formation of a team to ensure the enforcement. Aside from the periodic threats of arrest and hefty fines by the police, it has been largely business as usual. If the team did a proper job of enforcement, perhaps we would be talking of a flattened curve instead of increasing positivity rates.