In the words of Søren Kierkegaard, the 19th century Danish philosopher: “Life can only be understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards.” This can act as a constant reminder on why we all must interrogate our past with the objective of learning from it while at the same time using it to correct the mistakes we have made. Some people have simplified Kierkegaard’s wisdom with fewer words such as “experience is the best teacher.” But when it comes to technology, there are many lessons we can learn from our past mistakes. This is a wake-up call for our parliamentarians to start thinking on an Artificial Intelligence Law for Kenya. Such a law should help enhance capacity, create clarity from past data, leverage the same for competitiveness and protect the consumers from malicious use of AI. A clear example which comes to mind, is how technology was misused during the 2007 electoral process and how this plunged the country into violence where more than 1,300 people lost their lives. Although the technology that was being used then was online and short messaging service (SMS), it still created havoc, which we have not healed from up to today. On the use of new technology today, we can also learn from ByteDance, the parent company of video sharing App TikTok, which embedded a feature that enables users to develop deepfakes more easily. Deepfakes, where one can manipulate an image or video of a person into the likeness of another by using artificial neural networks, are the latest social media concern. The technology, which uses machine learning techniques, relies on autoencoders to produce a new video. And it is hard to tell if it is fake. It is simply manipulated media that looks genuine. These in my view can become a fodder for local techies especially in an election year. And it might also make politicians to have an excuse to cover up their gaffes. Hatemongers like the ones witnessed in 2007 can easily set the country on fire before we discover that it was all deepfakes. But we can avoid this and do what every country is doing by having a proper law in place. The law will be necessary because it can be used to create institutions that can deal with the future demands of technology and help us to avoid the mistakes that saw the continent miss out on the first and second industrial revolutions. Those mistakes continue to haunt the continent to date, while it is struggling to transition from agrarian economy to industrialisation and hopefully catch up with the rest of the world in the information age. That leap could be achieved faster through the emerging fourth industrial revolution (4IR) technologies. But it just doesn’t happen without making some sacrifices. As I write this article, there are global initiatives which are already ongoing in developing standards, strategies, legislation and collaborations on emerging technologies. Already, countries are sharing knowledge and experience on these emerging technologies. In all these initiatives, one part of the world that is conspicuously absent is Africa. On the other hand, the private sector in several African countries is deploying technologies like AI and blockchain for competitiveness. Many organisations are turning to AI-driven human resource management solutions without understanding if the algorithms in these solutions may have any bias. Since AI learns from data sets that human beings provide, there is likely risk of bias to be transmitted through it. If data lacked diversity, for example, that bias will be embedded in the solution. This calls for countries, Kenya included, to give priority to investments in emerging technologies that will enable Africa to realise greater productivity, reduce waste and improve governance. Like many others in Africa, I have had many opportunities to reflect on the question Abraham Maslow once posed: Why is it that we are all born with limitless potential, yet few people fulfil those possibilities? Well, the answers seem to buried in our past mistakes.