Former Attorney-General Githu Muigai. FILE PHOTO | NMG  A few weeks ago I commented in these columns on the appointment of the investment banker and corporate high-flier Chris Kirigua as the head of the newly created Public Private Partnerships (PPP) directorate at the Treasury. Until his appointment, our PPP programme was overseen by a small unit under the Treasury’s directorate of portfolio management. The commentary I wrote sought to place the significance of Mr Kirigua’s appointment in the context of our country’s ambition to create a robust framework and institutional mechanism for driving the PPP agenda. Two weeks later the Treasury Cabinet Secretary, Ukur Yattani, announced another significant appointment — that of former Attorney-General Githu Muigai, to chair another key institution in the PPP space namely the Private Public Partnership Petition Committee. I was not surprised when I started receiving calls from close observers of the goings-on in the PPP space asking me to comment on the significance of Prof Githu’s new appointment and what it means in terms pace and direction of policy in this area. I think Prof Githu’s appointment is an effort at giving this little-known committee a higher profile. It is all part of the ambition to put the PPP agenda in the hands of stronger institutions. Experience the world over has shown that successful PPP programmes only happen where you have strong and efficient institutions in charge. Nearly 10 years since we introduced a PPP legal framework plus a bureaucracy to spearhead and roll out projects, we still don’t have much success to show. Today, the North-to-South Highway in Malaysia that literally cuts the country into two is reputed to be the most successful PPP road project in the emerging market world. Malaysia’s PPP programme has succeeded because it is in the hands of strong institutions. The bureaucracy running the PPP programme in that country has been completing and bagging in one complex transaction after another every other year. Here, many people who used to tout the PPP model as the panacea for infrastructure development have long become cynics. This petitions committee that Prof Githu has been tasked to chair is the weakest link in the overall PPP framework. Part of the problem is in the fact that the committee has been operating as if its only mandate is to hear and to deal almost exclusively with procurement disputes. Eight years after the tribunal was established, you can count the number it has handled on the fingers of one hand. The big cases I can remember immediately include the dispute that arose during the aborted attempt to procure a foreign investor to run and manage Mombasa port’s second container terminal; the dispute that erupted during the procurement of the private investors we wanted to build for us the aborted 1,000 MW coal-fired thermal plant in Lamu; and the dispute that arose during the procurement of the lucrative $1 billion PPP contract for building the 175 kilometre Nairobi-Nakuru-Mau Summit road toll project. In retrospect, I think the mistake the designers of the PPP programme made was to create this committee at a time when we already had an existing framework for hearing procurement appeals under the Public Procurement and Disposals Act. The upshot has been inordinate delays, confusion and unending litigation over PPP projects. There have been instances where litigants have circumvented this tribunal and chosen to lodge parallel disputes at the Public Procurement Appeals Board. Although the PPP tribunal must under the law dispose of a dispute in a matter of 10 days, the committee rarely achieves this target. PPP procurement in this country works like a casino. When, as a contractor, you lose at the PPP tribunal you double your stakes and take your case to the courts. The point here is this: A successful PPP regime can only happen where you have procurement regime that delivers speed, finality and fair price.