Geothermal Development Corporation (GDC) has received a Sh549 million ($5 million) grant, paving the way for exploration works for Paka Geothermal Project in Baringo. The State-owned corporation said yesterday it had signed the geothermal risk mitigation facility (GRMF) grant with the African Union to fund exploration drilling programme for the project which was mooted in 2010. GDC wants to drill two deep geothermal wells and upgrade the existing infrastructure to allow further development of the geothermal resource in the project area. The grant will support 40 percent of the budget required to fund drilling and testing programme for the 100 megawatts project. The money will also be used to finance 20 percent of what GDC intends to spend on infrastructure upgrade for the project. “The Paka Geothermal Project is an integral component of GDC’s strategic plan, where the company envisions the development of 1,065MW from geothermal sources by 2030,” said GDC managing director Jared Othieno. GDC becomes the first public developer to sign the grant contract with the AU Commission, strengthening Kenya’s quest to deepen the share of geothermal energy in the national grid. The project is part of the first geothermal drilling programme in Baringo, Silali area, within Kenya’s East African Rift System. The East Africa Rift System has geothermal potential of 15,000mw, with about 67 percent in favour of Kenya. Kenya has been deepening supply of power from cheaper sources such as wind and steam to reduce power bills for consumers. Energy and Petroleum Authority data shows geothermal is the biggest contributor of power to the national grid, accounting for 44.12 percent followed by hydropower at 26.98 percent. Thermal is below 13 percent. THERMAL SHARE This is in contrast to 2014 when the share of thermal was at a high of 34.49 percent owing to erratic rains that reduced hydro power source. Kenya is however still stuck with expensive thermal power purchase agreements whose termination could attract up to Sh9 billion, according to 2018 estimates by the Energy ministry. The first contract ends in 2023 while the longest one expires in 2031. This could see consumers wait longer for much more cheaper bills despite thermal usage having declined.