IEBC Chairman Wafula Chebukati addresses journalists in Nairobi on September 1,2017. FILE PHOTO | NMG The by-elections held a few weeks ago caused uproar over the levels of violence. In the ensuing discussions, there was a war of words among politicians on who was to blame for the events. The role of security agencies came to the fore. Provision of security is an important aspect of guaranteeing free and fair elections. The Kenyan Constitution defines a credible election as one that is, among other things, free from violence. Consequently, preparations for elections normally include adequate arrangements for security, involving the Independent and Electoral Boundaries Commission (IEBC) liaising with security agencies in the country. As part of these requirements, the law provides that every polling station shall have assigned two police officers, who for purposes of election day, shall be considered election officials and placed under the control of the presiding officer for that polling station. When the country suffered from widespread electoral violence in 2007, security agencies were accused of having played a role in either fanning the violence or inability to stop the perpetrators. Due to the errors of omission and commission, security reforms became a priority action following those unfortunate events. The work of the Ransley Commission on police reforms laid a firm foundation for the fundamental changes to the way the country’s policing was undertaken, leading up to the robust constitutional provisions that sought to make the police more accountable and aligned to the rule of law. As part of preparations for the 2013 and 2017 elections, IEBC designed a capacity building and stakeholder engagement programme on election security. This was undertaken in concert with the National Police Service. Despite these, though, complaints about violence and excesses by the police continued. In 2017, violence, while not as massive as 2007, still led to loss of lives, injuries and destruction of property. The cooperation agreement known as the Handshake between President Uhuru and former Prime Minister Raila Odinga identified security reforms as one of the top issues to make the country more peaceful and cohesive. The importance of a professional police, and a calm atmosphere for electoral competition cannot be gainsaid. As the country moves towards the high-stakes 2022 elections, the level of polarisation is increasing and with it the temptation by the political class to employ dirty tricks, including use of violence, to secure their path to power. In the Kabuchai, Matungu and MCA by-elections that took place on the same day, the evidence of this was all too evident. This must be resisted at all costs. First, politicians must recognise that their actions determine the level of peace that is witnessed on election day. To travel with goons in tow, some even carrying weapons, and to attempt to threaten their opponents cannot lead to any other outcome but a violent election. Additionally, respect for the authority of election officials is paramount. There is a reason why conduct of elections is vested in IEBC. This is to ensure that there is a neutral umpire over the process. We do not have to like the election management body and its officials. We must, however, give them the space and respect they are guaranteed and entitled to under the country’s Constitution to oversee the process. When we are dissatisfied with their work, there is an elaborate dispute resolution process to address whatever complaints we may have. Taking the law into our hands is not an option, though. Thirdly is the role of security agencies. There is need for the police to strictly adhere to their oath of office, remain impartial and apply the law objectively. The political class by their nature will not resist the temptation to draw the police into their electoral contests. The onus is on the government and the IEBC to design measures to curb this temptation. Without addressing the challenge, the possibility that the police will be able to support credible elections will diminish.