Qatar Airways is one of the leading global airlines. FILE PHOTO | NMG Qatar Airways recently became the first global airline in the world to achieve the prestigious 5-Star Covid-19 Airline Safety Rating by international air transport rating organisation, Skytrax. Hamad International Airport (HIA), its home and hub, had also become the first airport in the Middle East and Asia to be awarded a Skytrax 5-Star Covid-19 Airport Safety Rating. These recognitions provide assurance to passengers across the world that airline health and safety standards are subject to the highest possible values of professional, independent scrutiny and assessment. For details of all the measures that have been implemented on-board Qatar Airways aeroplanes and at HIA, please visit qatarairways.com/safety. In addition, Qatar Airways achieved Diamond Standard in the Airline Passenger Experience Association’s (APEX’s) Health Safety Powered by SimpliFlying audit. This status, which is the highest level attainable, was announced by APEX and global aviation marketing consultancy, SimpliFlying, following a meticulous assessment of the airline’s robust Covid-19 hygiene and safety standards. The national carrier of the State of Qatar continues to rebuild its network, which currently stands at over 130 destinations. With more frequencies being added to key hubs, Qatar Airways offers unrivalled connectivity to passengers, making it easy for them to change their travel dates or destination if they need to. A multiple award-winning airline, Qatar Airways was named “World’s Best Airline” by the 2019 World Airline Awards, managed by international air transport rating organisation Skytrax. It was also named “Best Airline in the Middle East”, “World’s Best Business Class” and “Best Business Class Seat”, in recognition of its ground-breaking Business Class experience, Qsuite. Qsuite, a patented Qatar Airways product, features the industry’s first-ever double bed in Business Class, as well as privacy panels that stow away, allowing passengers in adjoining seats to create their own private room, a first of its kind in the industry. Qatar Airways is also the only airline to have been awarded the coveted “Skytrax Airline of the Year” title five times. The title is recognised as the pinnacle of excellence in the airline industry. HIA was recently ranked “Third Best Airport in the World”, among 550 airports worldwide, by the Skytrax World Airport Awards 2020. Rising from the fourth position in 2019 to third in 2020, HIA has been steadily improving in the World’s Best Airports rankings since the start of its operations in 2014. In addition, HIA was voted the “Best Airport in the Middle East” for the sixth year in a row and “Best Staff Service in the Middle East” for the fifth year in a row. Qatar Airways proudly supports a range of exciting international and local initiatives dedicated to enriching the global community it serves. The company, the official FIFA partner, is the sponsor of many top-level sporting events, including the FIFA World Cup Qatar 2022TM, reflecting the values of sports as a means of bringing people together. This is at the core of the airline’s own brand message– “Going Places Together”. Qatar Airways is the first global airline to offer passengers 100 percent Zero-Touch technology for its award-winning Oryx One in-flight entertainment system across the A350 fleet as part of its latest Covid-19 safety measures. The Zero-Touch technology, introduced in partnership with the Thales AVANT IFE system, will enable A350 passengers to pair their personal electronic devices (PEDs) with their seat-back IFE screen by connecting to ‘Oryxcomms’ Wi-Fi and simply scanning a QR code displayed on the screen. They can then use their PEDs to navigate and enjoy more than 4,000 options on offer through the airline’s award-winning Oryx One in-flight entertainment system, limiting the frequency of on board surface contact and providing greater peace of mind throughout the duration of their journey. This is an important step in taking the already rigorous and stringent Covid-19 precautions to another level, limiting passenger surface contact and preventing any possible spread of infection on board. The in-flight entertainment system offers passengers options from the latest blockbuster movies, TV box sets, music, games and much more. Passengers can also stay in touch with their friends and family around the world using the award-winning airline’s on-board Wi-Fi and GSM service. Book a holiday today and travel when you are ready with guaranteed flexibility, and rediscover the world with incredible offers to amazing destinations. Book by March 14, 2021 for travel until September 30, 2021. Not a Privilege Club member yet? Join today using the promo code JOINAFR21 and receive 1,500 Qmiles instantly. Welcome aboard Qatar Airways.