Ivy Minyow Onyango, the sole director of Kilig Limited. NMG PHOTO The director of a company that was awarded a Sh4 billion State contract for Covid-19 emergency equipment claims that she cannot recall the signatories to the firm’s bank accounts. Ivy Minyow Onyango, the sole director of Kilig Limited, told the National Assembly’s Public Investments Committee (PIC) Wednesday that she had no information on the signatories to the company’s bank accounts at Equity Bank and SBM Bank. “I need more time to go back to the bank and get the right information. I cannot remember who the signatories were because there was a joint venture for procurement of Covid-19 items. Give me two days to find out the bank signatories,” the 27-year-old lawyer told the committee. Kilig was awarded a Sh 4 billion tender for the procurement of 450,000 personal protective equipment (PPE) kits each valued at Sh9,000 to the State-run Kenya Medical Supplies Authority (Kemsa). The supply deal was, however, cancelled after queries were raised on the manner in which the contract was awarded. Ms Onyango claimed she could only recall that Kilig had accounts at the two banks but did not know who their signatories were. “We went into joint venture and opened bank accounts for envisioned transactions. I don’t know if the accounts were closed,” she said. Members of PIC, however, dismissed her claim and ordered her to provide a full disclosure of the account holders. “You cannot do business worth about Sh4 billion and you don’t know the bank account of your company yet you are a sole shareholder. You have portrayed yourself as a wise woman. How can you not know where your bank accounts are yet you chased for this big deal?” PIC chairman Abdulswamad Nassir said. Ms Onyango said Kilig had various partners, including manufactures and distributors, who came together to deliver the supplies to Kemsa. She told PIC that the joint venture also involved Wilbrod Gachoka, who has since resigned as director of Kilig. “There was Wilbrod Gachoka and Entec Enterprises a Chinese company who had vested interest in the joint venture,” Ms Onyango said. Ms Onyango told the committee that Collins Bush Wanjala— a son of Budalang’i MP Raphael Wanjala— was also a director of Kilig and that she took over the company from the junior Wanjala at a cost of Sh10,000. Ms Onyango told MPs that she incorporated Kilig in February 2019 after receiving instructions from his clients, Mr Gachoka and Zu Jinping. Mr Nassir, however, disputed the claims by Ms Onyango, saying official documents showed she never participated in the registration of Kilig. The PIC chairman tabled documents by Registrar of Companies, which showed that the firm was registered on January 22, 2020, with its directors as Zhu Jinping and Willbroda Gachoka. In April, the two transferred their shares to Collins Bush Wanjala, who later handed them over to Ivy Minyow Onyango in May. “Form CR9 notice of cessation of office of director dated May 7, 2020 and form CR19 special resolution dated May 5, 2020 and lodged by Collins Bush Wanjala, stated that Collins Bush Wanjala resigned as director/shareholder and transferred his 1,000 shares to Ivy Minyow Onyango,” states the document by the registrar. Kilig is among companies whose commitment letters were issued directly by the office of suspended CEO Jonah Manjari. Kemsa did not do any due diligence on Kilig, including its financial capability to supply the goods, shareholding or pre-qualification documents. The ownership of the company, which was registered on January 22, 2020, and is located at Methodist Ministry Centre, Block A 1st Floor, has been the subject of intense debate. Ms Onyango initially took MPs in circles, refusing to reveal the real owners of the company.