As the Covid-19 pandemic is disrupting every sector of our society, what is now coming out is the greater impact it has caused in our health systems. It has also revealed to us the state of our health sector, including its poor health infrastructure, bad governance and lack of ethical standards. The current situation we are experiencing in the country’s health system fits the description of the ugly side of capitalism by Nobel laureate economist Milton Friedman in a New York Times article of September 13, 1970: “The social responsibility of business is to increase its profits.” Friedman was keenly aware of the controversy the article would elicit. And in justifying the statement, he noted that it had to be in spite of the moral persuasion of the business managers. This ugly side of capitalism that is captured by Friedman, is what is haunting us now in Kenya as we battle the Covid-19 pandemic. Stories of extortion, medical negligence and malpractice have emerged as the third wave of the pandemic ravages the country. Desperate patients looking for hospital beds are being asked to pay as much as Sh1 million as deposits before admission. The high hospital fees do not correspond with the services that are being offered. At one hospital, a patient who was desperately gasping for air and needed emergency attention had to wait for more than 30 minutes before a nurse started to examine him. In another case, a nurse ordered the relatives of a patient to fill in the lengthy forms first before she could beckon the doctors to attend to what was clearly an emergency case. And in some of the mushrooming private hospitals, patients are admitted and left unattended. There are many untold stories from many hospitals that are going against the spirit of the law and good service needed to manage the impact of Covid-19. Patients have a right to emergency medical services but when the hospital asks for money before attending to the patient, it is breaking the law and should be held accountable. The Health Act of 2017 requires that a national health system which encompasses public and private institutions and health providers at the national and county levels facilitate health services in a progressive and equitable manner, and attain the highest standard. The Act further states that its intentions are to “protect, respect, promote and fulfil the health rights of all persons in Kenya, including ... the right to emergency medical treatment.” But what we are experiencing in some of what is referred to as hospitals can be described as registered lodgings by greedy doctors out to exploit hapless citizens. Most of them do not have even a single ventilator or adequate arrangements for oxygen supplementation but still admit Covid-19 patients. The regulator, especially the Kenya Medical Practitioners and Dentists Council (KMPDC), has a duty to classify especially private hospitals in such a way that can make people to understand their capacities. There is need to clarify the practices by some hospitals based on what the Health Act says. In my view, 'Emergency Care' are services that are offered by hospitals to prevent the death of patients or address serious health impairment of the recipient. A good doctor is always judged by how quickly he or she can assess the capacities to take care of an emergency and if not, how quickly he or she refers the patient to capable facilities where such emergencies can be dealt with without the consideration of money. In the era of digital age, I suggest that KMPDC should consider two investments at every hospital as part of its regulatory mandate. First is leveraging Internet of Things (IoT) in all emergency rooms. Second, is developing an app that is regularly updated by the hospitals based on their capacities and operating standard procedures for every case they handle.