Omar Lali cries after DPP terminated murder charges on July 16, 2020. FILE PHOTO | NMG Keroche heiress Tecra Muigai sent millions of shillings to her boyfriend Omar Lali until two months to her death in May last year, an inquest heard Tuesday. Documents tabled in court showed that Tecra sent the money through M-Pesa and bank transfers and some of the amounts would be sent in a span of two days. She died on May 2 in an apartment where she was staying with her boyfriend in Lamu County and an inquest was ordered by the Director of Public Prosecutions Noordin Haji, to establish the cause of her death. Police investigators reckon that she sent millions of shillings to Mr Lali over a period from August 2019 to March. Police did not make public the total sum sent to Mr Lali, but part of mobile money transaction and bank statements indicated that the Lamu resident received up to Sh105,000 via M-Pesa in one month. He also received up to Sh400, 000 monthly through banks transfers, according to statements tabled in court Tuesday. Keroche Breweries chief executive Tabitha Karanja, while testifying in the inquest into Tecra’s death, said her late daughter transferred money to Mr Lali’s accounts. Mrs Karanja told the inquest presided by Senior Resident Magistrate Martha Nanzushi that she wants justice. Keroche CEO said she found it strange that her daughter would pay bills for Mr Lali as she was the younger one in the relationship. Mr Lali skipped the inquest and was not represented at the hearing. Documents produced in court showed that Tecra sent a total of Sh105,000 in March 2020 and transferred through RTGS Sh20, 000 on March 5; Sh45, 000 two days later and Sh40,000 on March 25. The money was sent to his bank account at Gulf African Bank. Tecra transferred Sh150,000 to Mr Lali’s account on August 19, 2019 and a similar amount the following day. The former director of strategy and innovation at the Naivasha-based brewer died of head injuries after she allegedly fell from her rented apartment in Shella, Lamu Island. An autopsy later revealed that she died from injuries consistent with a fall down the stairs. She had sustained injuries in the left side of her head. Mr Lali was to be charged with the murder of Tecra before the High Court in Garsen last year but the DPP withdrew the case and ordered the inquest to be conducted. Mrs Karanja’s executive assistant, Saritah Ikenye, tabled the M-Pesa records, saying Ms Tecra had instructed the family to be sending money to Mr Lali’s mobile phone. In December 2019, for example, she said she sent a total of Sh80,000 to him in two tranches on December 19 and 28. Between January 14 and 20, 2020, she sent to his mobile phone a total of Sh80,000. The witness, who works at a restaurant in Naivasha, said Tecra was picked up for a trip to Mt Kenya region and proceeded to Meru National Park in October. "We all stayed at a hotel. Omar was very agitated but they calmed him down and had fun," he said. The witness further said that a Mr Cheruiyot, Tecra’s driver, intervened on many occasions in disputes between the two. "I left them there and proceeded to the venue. A few minutes later I saw Tecra and Omar in the company of Cheruiyot. It appeared things had cooled down but Omar isolated himself," he said. "Omar eventually came to our table and they had another argument. I am not sure whether it was a jealousy issue. It was the first time I saw Omar grab Roy, a friend. Tecra intervened." The hearing continues today.