Shareholders follow proceedings during an annual general meeting in Nairobi in 2019. FILE PHOTO | NMG The system of corporate governance practiced in Kenya and several other commonwealth countries, has got distinctive features including emphasis on single (one-tiered) board of directors that comprises predominantly non-executive leaders. Apart from the United States, many other nations following this system of corporate governance (Anglo-American governance model) expect companies listed on their stock exchanges to have different individuals serving in the chief executive and board chairperson positions. Individuals serving on boards of directors are also supposed to be elected by shareholders. The Anglo-American governance model also places shareholders’ interests before all other interested parties, and further assumes that shareholders will remain actively involved in all major company decisions. These include appointing directors through a formal vote and ratifying important board decisions such as remuneration packages for top management and sale of major company assets. Thus, shareholders have an important role to play in supporting a thriving corporate governance environment anywhere. To fulfil this duty, they are expected to closely scrutinise their company’s operations and the conduct of the board of directors. This can be done in various ways including demanding increased accountability about company performance and conducting detailed inspections of annual reports and other financial data pertaining to their firm. Shareholders are also expected to attend general meetings to, among other things, vote for their preferred directors, ratify external auditors proposed by the board of directors, influence company strategy, and veto top management pay. This makes them an important cog in the corporate governance wheel. In many leading economies in Africa, such as Nigeria and South Africa, and elsewhere in the world, shareholders have advocacy groups – generally referred to as shareholders associations – which provide oversight over actions of top company management. These associations help to safeguard welfare of shareholders and serves as a voice for minority ownerws. They can also help to scrutinise financial statements on behalf of minority shareholders who might lack the ability to understand complex accounting transactions and other financial information. Shareholder groups can also play a crucial advocacy role on behalf of minority owners, by providing safeguards against excessive influence by those with muscle. Research on ownership of companies listed on stock exchanges of many developing countries shows that ownership of such firm is dominated by few owners, such as influential businesspeople, politicians or families. This poses a problem for other shareholders as the large ones may not always be attentive to the needs of the minority. It is due to the above observations that corporate governance scholars view shareholders associations as an important lever for enhancement of shareholders rights and good corporate governance practices overall. However, Kenya lacks a shareholder association to champion the rights of local shareholders despite being home to one of the oldest and leading stock exchanges in Africa – the Nairobi Securities Exchange (NSE). Such an association can help to empower minority shareholders in dismantling old-boys networks perpetuated by large shareholders as well as in preventing hostile takeovers. With barely 40 percent of Kenyan adults being financially literate, according to the 2019 FinAccess Household Survey, shareholder associations can assist minority players in making informed investment decisions based on a company’s future financial prospects. The shareholders association can also help to interpret financial statement information and other corporate communication published in English, for shareholders who may not be adequately conversant with the English language. As Kenya – and Nairobi in particular – readies itself to be the leading financial centre in the East African region, more needs to be done to promote an organised and vibrant shareholder culture. In view of this, the Capital Markets Authority of Kenya, as the regulator and lead oversight body of capital market activities in Kenya, should encourage and support the establishment of an autonomous shareholder association that is led by minority shareholders. The CMA could do this by facilitating the setting up of the association’s offices or even funding its establishment and its initial budget. Kimani, is a lecturer in accounting at University of Essex, UK