Workstyle by Landron Group at The Address on September 18, 2020 in Nairobi. PHOTO | DIANA NGILA | NMG If there is any important lesson that the Covid-19 pandemic might have taught businesses, then it would be cost-cutting. Ideologically, cost cutting measures such as downsizing, laying off employees, closing facilities, streamlining supply chains and moving to less expensive buildings were unimportant to many businesses pre-coronavirus. After President Uhuru Kenyatta imposed one of the strictest lockdown measures such as movement restrictions and dusk-to-dawn curfews to contain the spread of the virus last year, enterprises realised how unimportant large working spaces were amid tough economic conditions. The acceptance of online shopping sites on websites and social media platforms (for example Facebook, Instagram and Twitter) also informed the decision. As demand for larger spaces dwindled, requests for smaller units in Nairobi's central business district (CBD) grew. Thus, building owners repurposed large spaces that were left by single tenants into stalls. The defunct Tuskys Magic, which sits between Ronald Ngala and Mfangano Streets in Nairobi, has now been turned into stalls. The overhauled space is now partially occupied with tenants, just a few weeks after it was commissioned. Each tenant is required to pay Sh300,000 in goodwill, with the highest rent going for Sh20,000 to Sh25,000 monthly. Bigger spaces range from Sh30,000 to Sh35,000. BuyRentKenya chief executive officer (CEO) Elizabeth Costabir says stalls are becoming popular as they are affordable in terms of monthly rents. “The stalls again seem to have gained more popularity since the pandemic due to reduced wages and, in some cases, loss of jobs which has resulted in many people opening businesses to get income or to sustain their living,” the CEO explains. For building owners though, smaller units (stalls) translate to about 90 percent of rental income compared to a single tenant. “It is not really about more revenue but more of a guaranteed income "With many units, at least 80-90 percent of the rental income can come in easily compared to one large retailer meeting the rent payment and sustaining it for a long period of time,” Ms Costabir adds. Knight Frank Kenya Retail Portfolio Manager Ashmi Shah reckons that stalls reduce the risk of reduced income if one or few tenants decide to leave. “They are becoming popular for tenants who do not require large spaces in formal malls or use them as pick-up or drop-off points for deliveries “Their outlay is also lower compared to the malls to allow a variety of trades in the same space to give shoppers more choice,” Mr Shah argues. A few metres away is Reli Co-operative House, sitting between the Mfangano and Hakati streets. The entire ground flour, which was also left by Tuskys, is now full of stalls. For instance, the smallest stall with a Sh400,000 goodwill goes for Sh30,000 per month. On the other hand, those with the highest goodwill of Sh1.6 million cost Sh60,000 monthly. This covers six-years. The demise of retail giants such as Nakumatt, Tuskys and Shoprite left hundreds of square metres of spaces empty. Occupancy was, thereafter, dealt a blow when the government imposed one of the toughest lockdown measures that included dusk-to-dawn curfew as well as social distancing measures to curb the spread of Covid-19. Apart from stalls, the pandemic also heightened demand for smaller office spaces as employees work from homes. Reduced spaces mean companies can save on high rental costs. Equally, big offices are now being partitioned. Due to this, shared spaces popularity grew for being affordable as a company did not need to rent an entire building or floor but an office desk. Shared spaces were synonymous with foreign brands and freelancers a while back. Mainstream companies, nonetheless, are slowly embracing them. “Big offices are now converting to smaller spaces due to reduced staff numbers in the office or downsizing. “A lot of companies have maintained the work from home policy reducing the need for the big space anymore,” BuyRentKenya CEO says. Some companies that provide co-working spaces in the country include Kofisi and Workstyle Africa. Knight Frank Kenya Head of Agency Anthony Havelock says there is a trend where some larger businesses are downsizing or re-evaluating space needs. “A further noticeable development is the increase in overflow space and the resultant increase in fitted offices which are now being marketed; this is due to contraction,” Mr Havelock notes. Mr Shah, however, reckons that smaller spaces are not necessarily cheaper. One drawback with small spaces is that they require constant management, thereby increasing the administrative costs. For instance, a company operating Grade A traditional office is estimated to spend Sh173,600 per 1,500 square feet on a team of six staff on base rent. It would also spend Sh32,550 on service charge monthly, Sh129,600 depreciation mostly for furniture, fittings, and equipment. Another Sh86,800 on expenses like internet, cleaning, office management, coffee, drinking water, printer, and office supplies, and Sh30,000 monthly on utilities such as electricity, water among others. This grows to Sh455,700, but Workstyle says the figure can drop to Sh227, 850 under private office and Sh162,750 under co-working spaces. According to Knight Frank, the popularity of flexible workplaces has overtaken traditional office rentals. “This model has particularly struck a chord with SMEs, maturing start-ups and multinationals, where flexibility and cost effectiveness — not only in the number of desks, but also in the length of lease — is highly attractive,” the company said in its 2019 Kenyan market report.