A Kenya Airways plane. FILE PHOTO | NMG Kenya Airways has brought competition to the doors of its subsidiary Jambojet and Uganda Airlines with the introduction of direct flights between Kisumu-Mombasa-Entebbe routes ahead of Easter holidays next month . The national carrier seeks to capitalise on high demand for Easter holiday, increase its flight frequencies from Nairobi to Kisumu, Mombasa, Eldoret and Entebbe from March 18 to April 19 with the Entebbe-Mombasa route operating two weekly flights from April 1 to 5. Uganda Airlines started Entebbe- Mombasa flights last year after reviving its national carrier after over 10 years out of operation. Mombasa is a favourite destination for Ugandan tourists with the country topping the list of visitors coming to Kenya. “To meet the expected increased travel demand during the Easter holiday, the national carrier, Kenya Airways will increase its flight frequencies from Nairobi to Kisumu, Mombasa, Eldoret and Entebbe. Travellers on these routes will enjoy greater flexibility during the festive period from March 18 to April 19, 2021,” said Julius Thairu, Kenya Airways acting chief commercial and customer officer. While acknowledging that the situation remains fluid, the official said the scheduled enhancement will help meet the growing passenger demand during this period and provide more choices, flexibility, and convenience. "We have seen signs of demand from customers who want to visit their family and friends or go on vacation, and their travel booking intent remains largely unchanged. We, however, continue to monitor trends and observe the Covid-19 protocols to ensure passengers’ comfort and safety even with increased demand," he said. Mr Thairu said the Easter celebrations are part of the airline's commitment to enhance customer experience with unique and seasonal offerings. KQ will be charging about Sh19,170 for a one way ticket from Mombasa to Entebbe while Ugandan Airlines is charging Sh24,860 on the same route for a one way ticket. Jambojet has increased flights to all the local destinations on citing high demand ahead of the Easter holiday next month. The carrier has indicated that there has been a surge in bookings on the week leading to Easter, prompting them to enhance the number to offer passengers more options. The airline has increased the direct flights from Eldoret to Mombasa to five weekly from four initially with an additional flight on Thursday. The direct flight to the coastal city was introduced last year and targeted tourists from western Kenya who seek convenience of flying directly to the coastal city without making a stopover in Nairobi. The airline flies from Eldoret to Kisumu before proceeding to Mombasa.