Telkom CEO Mugo Kibati. FILE PHOTO | NMG A dispute between Telkom (K) Ltd and Coast Terminal East Africa Ltd (CTEAL) will now be heard after parties failed to resolve it out of court. Telkom (K) Ltd has sued CTEAL seeking a permanent injunction restraining it from entering into or using its premises which served it as principal landing station and an entry point at which undersea cables entered the country. On Monday, Justice Sila Munyao of the Environment and Land Court directed the case to be heard on November 16 after being informed that there was no settlement between the parties. Telkom says that it is the registered proprietor of the premises commonly known as ‘Mombasa telephone house’ located in Mombasa town and now wants a declaration issued that CTEAL is not entitled to enter or use it. In its suit papers filed in 2019, Telkom said it was in the process of completing a merger with Airtel Network Kenya Ltd and one of the key components in the transaction was the property. Telkom says that unless CTEAL was restrained from entering into the property or interfering with the premises, successful completion of the merger transaction might be jeopardised. It says that despite there being no lease for the property, early 2019 CTEAL attempted to enter the premises and commence construction works. Telkom says that this was an unlawful interference with its “quite possession of the property” and amounts to trespass. Telkom says that on or around August 2018, it offered to lease an undeveloped portion of the premises to CTEAL for ten years. However, it argues that CTEAL failed to accept the offer by August 30 2018 as required and around February 9, after the offer had lapsed, purported to accept it by forwarding a signed copy of the letter of offer. “The defendant (CTEAL) did not however pay the security deposit and advance rent of Sh1,281,355.20 as required in the letter of offer,” argues Telkom. Telkom further says that it wrote a letter to CTEAL notifying it that the letter of offer stood rescinded for failure to pay the security deposit and advance rent as required. It (Telkom) says that CTEAL wrote a letter alleging that the delay in paying the security deposit and advance rent was on account of a long-standing dispute between the County Government of Mombasa and Telkom regarding rates payable in respect of the premises. “The defendants also confirmed that it had since paid Sh1,281,355.20. However, the defendant’s (CTEAL) cheque for the said amount bounced and was not cleared,” argues Telkom. Telkom also argues that the dispute between itself and the County Government of Mombasa had no bearing on the offer and is immaterial. In its response to an application by Telkom, CTEAL says that even before signing the letter of offer, it took possession of the premises in August 2018 is still in possession.