Your disciplined or undisciplined life drives your success or failure not only in personal life but in business as well. In order to accomplish your demanding goals, you have to protect your health, time, relationships and all the things you treasure against scavengers such as distractions, inaction and natural drifting. In the last couple of years, I have had the privilege of meeting and dinning with very successful managers, state officers, scholars and entrepreneurs in the course of my work. One thing I have noticed and underlined as the common denominator is their high level of self-discipline in matters personal. Nearly all successful men and women I have met have a clear policy, routine or habits that define their lives and which they guard with a lot of zeal and self-discipline. There are some who would leave an important meeting to go and pray if it is their time to do so. Some would forgo eating in a restaurant if they don’t get the menu they have chosen to eat – mostly based on personal choice and not doctor’s advice. They don’t compromise because of the situation. There are others who would have set certain times for personal exercise, to be with family or perform other routines and nothing can alter their schedule unless if it is a matter of life and death. Basically what separates achievers and failures in life is the level of discipline. It is not the level of education, type of professional or business sector one is in. For instance, some self-care habits such sleeping enough time, eating well, exercising regularly, connecting with the people we love, engaging in meaningful hobbies, and making time for personal reflection requires high level of self-discipline. Your personal private life is the back office of your business and public life. Whatever happens here secretly is manifested openly in the public. It is impossible to be self-discipline in business or work if you lack self-discipline in your personal life. The moment you develop self-discipline in your personal life everything else around changes. A discipline and principled person is able to stay on a chosen path and say no to anything else even when the going gets tough. Their habits and actions are not dictate by circumstances or situations. An entrepreneur who lacks self-discipline will be hopping from one project to another without taking time to develop it to maturity. Such a person is likely to be doing so many things and reaping very little and complain how slow or tough things are. Disciplined people embrace self-care habits that drive them to success at work. For example, when they eat well, exercise regularly, stick to good relations and control what they read, watch and think, they have more energy and are more productive. They also develop resilience and persistence which are powerful ingredients of success. Enough rest, good sleep and exercises together with the right diet are the greatest known boosters of creativity. They protect one from burnout, which is a great source of unproductivity and poor health amongst most entrepreneurs. Mr Kiunga is a business trainer and the author of ‘The Art of Entrepreneurship: Strategies to Succeed in a Competitive Market’.