Push-ups seem like simple exercises where one uses their hands to push themselves to and away from the ground. However, push-ups can be complete workouts on their own and they are must-do. They shape and improve the upper body and the abdominal and butt muscles. They also strengthen the core muscles, aligning the spine hence, mitigating back pains. “Push-ups can be done anywhere and they are very effective because they exercise multiple muscles of the body. The exercise mostly works on the shoulders, chest, arms, and back muscles,” says Robinson Lemayian, a fitness trainer. But how many should you do? “Do 15 repetitions of three sets each every day, three times a week, if you are a beginner. After building fitness levels, increase the number to 20, three sets each day,” says Lemayian, who currently in a push-up challenge month where he is doing 50 reps of three sets and will then upgrade the challenge to three sets of 100 reps a day. There are many different forms. Wide push-ups This involves lowering your body by bending the elbows, keep your core tight and back flat, until your chest grazes the floor. Extend the elbows and push your body back up to starting position making sure the hips do not sag down or point upwards. “This push-up engages the core and the muscles which make up the butt. It builds upper-body and core strength as it targets chest, shoulder and upper arms muscles.” Diamond push-ups This type of push-up targets the chest muscles, the triceps, and biceps. To do it, start in a plank position on all fours with your legs extended behind and hands stacked directly under your shoulders. The hands should be positioned together with the fingers spread creating a diamond or triangle shape with your index fingers under your chest. Then lower your chest toward the ground, ensuring your elbows point back towards your feet then push the floor away from you to return to starting position. Pike push-up Start with a push-up position on the floor, with your arms straight and your hands shoulder-width apart. Then lift your hips and walk your feet in closer to your hands so that your body forms an upside-down V. Your legs and arms should stay as straight as possible. From here, bend your elbows and lower your upper body down and forwards, until the top of your head nearly touches the floor. Your head should be in front of your hands once your elbows bend. From the bottom position, push down into the floor hard with your hands and keep your elbows in close to your body to straighten your arms and return to the start position. Make sure that as you push your body upwards, you maintain the angle at your hips rather than pressing your chest away from the floor and collapsing at the hips. “This exercise engages the glutes and hamstrings and helps to tone and strengthen your entire upper body including arms and back,” he says. Scapula push-ups This type of push-up will help stabilise the shoulders, soothe neck pains, strengthen muscles around the ribs and upper chest which are essential for optimal shoulder performance as well as enhancing good posture. When carrying out the workout, one needs to start with the hands on a wall, bench, or floor, with the hands directly under the shoulders. Keep the arms extended, pinch the shoulder blades together before retracting the same by drawing them together then detract them by pulling them apart. Lower your body slightly. Push back up. Make sure, the core and glutes are engaged so the hips do not sink while also keeping the spine at a neutral position. Dead-stop push-up This type of push-up involves starting in a high plank with palms flat, hands shoulder-width apart, shoulders stacked directly above the wrists, legs extended behind you, and core and glutes engaged. Then bend the elbows and lower the chest to the floor. When it hits the floor, raise your hands so the chest is resting on the floor. Place the hands back down then push through the palms of your hands to straighten your arms. Decline push-up For this, place your toes on a bench or step, then get into a high plank with palms flat, hands shoulder-width apart, shoulders stacked directly above the wrists, core, and glutes engaged. Bend the elbows and lower your chest to the floor then push through the palms of your hands to straighten the arms.