The post-Covid-19 era in Kenya has introduced new realities in the workplace for many firms, shaped by new habits and regulations based on reduced close-contact interaction and restrictions. To survive, firms have been forced to innovate in several ways including adoption of digital assets with employees being retrained to fit in the new order. The new normal has seen many brick-and-mortar companies forced to offer their products online since their clients can no-longer visit their premises for purchases. For instance, Walt Disney, a company that generated most of its revenues from Theme Parks and Cruise Ships was forced to depend on online video streaming services — Disney+ and recently launched Star. The fact that people have started embracing the new normal is evident with the rise in Zoom subscriptions. In its latest earning report for 2021, the video conferencing app reported a 369 per cent rise in revenues compared to the previous year. In the report, Zoom had 467,000 clients with more than 10 employees, 1,644 enterprise customers with over $100,000 annual revenue and 10,700 phone customers. Latest data from the Communications Authority of Kenya (CA) showed that Safaricom increased its fixed Internet subscribers by a record 22,008 to 229,406 between July and September 2020. Wananchi Group and Jamii Telecommunications also recorded bigger traffic as workers subscribed to connect to their offices. With many people losing their jobs as businesses closed, households started exploring the option of working online. This led to an increased subscription to online courses, creating online jobs for Kenyans. With the closure of entertainment joints, people were forced to seek entertainment online, resulting in higher subscriptions to online games, social media applications such as TikTok, and higher video game console purchases such as Playstation 5 and Xbox. During the pandemic, employees reduced their expenditure on bus fare, fuel, food, school fees and entertainment since they were forced to work from home. With reduced taxation and lower interest rates, they were left with excess liquidity with no physical investment avenues. This led to the current surge in online trading of global financial markets. Looking at the Kenyan stock market in contrast with global financial markets, work-from-home investors have realised the wide gap in liquidity, diversity, sophistication, and potential returns. Since more than 75 per cent of the Kenyans population is aged under 35 and possesses a very high Internet penetration rate, they are well-positioned to take advantage of these opportunities. The recent move by the Capital Markets Authority of Kenya to licence and regulate financial markets brokers has made it possible for Kenyans to access these markets from locally regulated brokers. On a positive note, the pandemic will be remembered for democratising access to global investment opportunities, online education, marketplace, job market and social/corporate meetings.