Adverse changes in financial market prices and rates that negatively impact the value of your security or investment portfolio is classified as a market risk. Professional portfolio managers subdivide the market risk that they manage into equity price risk, interest-rate risk, foreign exchange risk, and commodity price risk. Portfolio managers spend a considerable amount of time managing idiosyncratic risks (i.e. specific risks) in their portfolios. Specific risk is unique to a particular financial transaction under consideration. Portfolio managers mitigate specific risk through diversification, whereas systematic risk cannot be diversified. Systemic risk influences the entire market at the same time. Ordinary banks and Central Counterparty Clearing House (CCP’s) in Kenya are upgrading their market risk frameworks and infrastructure as a result of dramatic changes in the capital markets. This effort includes implementing new market risk metrics, upgrading market risk systems, building a robust infrastructure, stress testing, and hedging market risks. Dynamic hedging strategies that involve an ongoing series of trades need relevant specific corporate information, market data, and statistical tools to guard against adverse changes in prices. For example, Kenya Airways in 2014 hedged against increasing jet fuel costs. Hedging against rising fuel prices seemed smart until the trend in oil prices reversed mid-year 2014. This reversal negatively affected Kenya Airways' share price and increased operational costs. Financial innovation is strengthening access to capital markets, improving liquidity in equity markets, and encouraging participants to upgrade their approach to managing equity risk. The Capital Markets Authority (CMA) licensed the Nairobi Securities Exchange (NSE) in May 2019 to offer Equity Single Stock Futures (ESSF) and Equity Index Futures (EIF). Licenses to introduce other derivatives products are being considered. The introduction of ESSF and the EIF index trading products at the NSE make the CMA the most recent Emerging Market (EM) in Africa. This provides the link that integrates Kenyan financial markets with international markets. Potential losses in a bond investment portfolio can be explained by examining the changes in the present value and timing of future cash flows. If interest rates rise, for instance, then the value of a bond or other fixed-income investment will decline. Interest rate risk can also be impacted by government policy decisions. Corporate treasurers refer to interest rate risk in the banking book as a risk that the bank’s capital and earnings will decline arising from adverse movements in interest rates. Interest rate risk in the trading book is marked to market on a continuous basis. After years of complaints, the Kenya government passed a law in September 2016 that capped the level of interest rates banks could charge to their customers and businesses. The Central Bank of Kenya condemned the move on the grounds that interest rate caps would undermine the conduct of monetary policy and amount to a government policy reversal on interest rates as well as negatively impact financial intermediation. Subsequently, banks started cherry-picking borrowers. This exacerbated financial exclusion and the capacity to borrow. For example, withdrawing credit from SMEs and those that do not have access to the banking system has implications on economic growth and therefore posed risks to financial stability. Foreign exchange risk arises from transacting with foreign currencies. For example, this risk affects a company’s financial performance arising from changes in the exchange rates between the Kenyan shilling and the other foreign currencies. An investor can eliminate foreign exchange risk by avoiding investing in foreign assets. However, exchange risks can be substantially mitigated through the use of hedged exchange-traded funds or by the individual investor using various investment instruments, such as currency forwards or futures, or options. The value of Kenya shilling noticeably declined following the economic and political uncertainties created by the 2017 elections, the global financial market volatility arising from quantitative tapering, and tightened monetary policy in the developed markets. Moreover, the demand for Kenyan securities, particularly Eurobonds declined. Conversely, short-term capital (hot money) flowed into the country to capitalise on higher earnings emerging from rising interest rates and expected changes in exchange rates. Commodity risk refers to the uncertainties of future market values and income caused by the fluctuation in the prices of commodities such as gold, coffee, copper, and so on. The price risk of commodities differs considerably from interest rate and foreign exchange risk since most commodities trade in markets in which the concentration of supply is in the hands of a few suppliers who can magnify price volatility Increased risks in the costs of commodities and regulatory risk arise when laws and regulations have the potential to impact the prices or availability of commodities. For example, new regulations governing the management of Kenyan tea, coffee, and sugar have caused noticeable changes in commodity prices. Governance issues have principally been the root causes of risk in the management of Kenyan commodities. Dr Mark is a managing partner at Black Diamond Risk Enterprises Mr Kingori is the founder of Fincap Risk Advisors