Law Society of Kenya President Nelson Havi during an interview at LSK offices on March 2, 2020. PHOTO | DIANA NGILA | NAIROBI The High Court has said it has powers to hear a dispute between the Law Society of Kenya (LSK) and the Federation of Kenya Employers (FKE) which is seeking to offer legal counsel to its membership. The dispute arose in 2019 after the LSK moved to court saying FKE had overstepped its mandate by claiming to offer limited legal services of representing its members’ rights. The FKE placed an advertisement on a billboard and its website, promising its membership legal counsel on employment and labour issues at a reasonable fee. The LSK however termed the advertisement unlawful and misleading to the general public and constituted an infringement of LSK’s member’s rights and practice of an exclusive profession. LSK further said the move was a threat to its consumer rights. The employers’ representative however opposed the case saying it should be handled by Employment and Labour court. High Court judge James Makau however dismissed the objection by FKE stating that the constitutional questions raised by LSK do not relate to employment and labour relations. “I find that no issue has been demonstrated to arise as labour relations between the Respondent (FKE) and its members. The issue that arise is whether the indication by the Respondent on its Bill board that it provides “legal services” is in contravention of the Advocates Act, the Law Society Act and various provisions of the Constitution,” the Judge said. FKE had defended the advertisement saying it is registered trade union and wondered why LSK was questioning the extent of the its role in representing its members under the Employment Act. The federation also argued that the dispute was a labour issue as it touches on its relationships with its members in the field of labour where it represents them. FKE said the billboard was a method of member recruitment and attracting prospective members by listing the services to provide. FKE said the case was an attempt to limit its right to reach out to its members and the general public through billboard advertisement, an act that amounts to interference with its freedom of association. But LSK says by passing off as practising law and offering broad based legal services was in contravention of the Advocates Act, adding that the law only allows LSK members to represent persons in court.