There has been an enhanced uptake of e-commerce since Covid-19 began globally. The shift is driven by the  physical distancing offered by the digital channels, in essence cutting disease transmission risk to consumers. In Kenya, for example in the legal sector courts have now gone digital and it has enhanced the volumes of digital transactions in the sector. The increased volumes of digital transactions, however call for law change especially in so far as consumer protection is concerned. There are diverse consumer protection issues that arise in a digital transaction. For example, how is a consumer protected from false and misleading advertisements? Unscrupulous sellers often misrepresent the quality of their goods or services, thereby injuring the consumer. A friend was telling me that she suffered loss after ordering clothing from an online shop. What the seller advertised and what was delivered were two different things. My friend had already pre-paid for the clothing and therefore suffered loss when what was delivered was not the quality that she had ordered for. A second consumer rights related issue that arises is how to protect consumers from purchasing harmful goods or services. A study done on counterfeiting and illicit trade in Kenya revealed that many consumers purchase substandard counterfeited products through the cyber world. A lot of copyright infringement takes place through the cyber world. This is especially for literary, visual, audio-visual and artistic works. Someone might sell an infringed work, for example giving access to illegally downloaded books. How are consumers protected from this? The cyber world is a complicated place as there are no geographical borders. This presents a challenge in terms of lodging claims. For example, if an American manufacturer sells to a Kenyan consumer a harmful product, how will the Kenyan recover noting the differences in jurisdiction? Al these instances highlight the need for legal reforms to protect the consumer as digital transactions increase. Consumer protection can be enhanced two fold. Firstly, by reforming the consumer laws to cover end product/ service users and secondly by reforming the digital laws to regulate the suppliers. Kenya’s consumer laws are contained in several laws including the Constitution. Article 46 of the Constitution states that consumers have the right to goods and services of reasonable quality, right to receive information, right to protection and receive compensation. Both the Consumer Protection Act and the Competition Act have very sound provisions protecting the consumers from false advertising and from harmful goods and services. But as pointed earlier, despite these provisions, consumers are still not adequately protected in online transactions. The Competition Authority of Kenya (CAK) is the organisation mandated with consumer protection in Kenya. On its website it has highlighted how aggrieved consumers can file complaints. It has also published Consumer Protection Guidelines to guide suppliers on how to uphold consumer protection in Kenya. On the ICT front, the Communications Authority Of Kenya has published Consumer Protection Regulations which mostly regulate their licensed suppliers. In the United Kingdom online transactions are regulated by a series of laws, one being E-commerce Regulations, the other being Consumer Protection (Distance Selling) Regulations. The first regulation regulates how e-commerce transactions should take place while the latter law regulates issues such as credit card transactions. I am therefore making a case for the amendment of consumer protection laws to protect consumers of online goods or services.