Samia Suluhu was sworn in as Tanzania's sixth president on March 19, 2021. She becomes the country's first female President. PHOTO | FILE Last week, Tanzania swore in the country's first woman President Samia Suluhu Hassan, after the demise of President John Pombe Magufuli. Rising from a clerk to public administrator to community activist to Vice-President and now President, there is no doubt she has worked her way up the ladder through sheer hard work. In one of the old clips of a meeting with women leaders, she talks about her journey post-secondary school to Vice President. She mentions that when the ruling party CCM settled on her as the VP candidate for the party she first rejected the nomination when former President Jakaya Kikwete broke the news to her. She thought she wasn't prepared to be a VP as she had set her eyes on a parliamentary seat. Now, in that clip President Hassan demonstrates that she possesses one quality needed for her new office — a calm demeanour. She mentions that she learned that it was better not to exchange words with political rivals even when the worst was being said about her. And it is her advice to other women to conduct their politics with the same demeanour. There is no doubt that over the past years Tanzania has regressed in terms of civic and political rights. During President Kikwete's time, The EastAfrican, one of the publications of NMG, had its licence suspended for publishing a cartoon criticising the then President Jakaya Kikwete. The space for media to demand transparency across all sectors of society and government as well as civil society applying pressure for better performance from government deeply shrank under President Magufuli. Local media rarely criticised the President or the government. Journalists and civil society members who dared do so ended up in prison through trumped-up charges. So, President Hassan has the chance to correct this travesty by opening up the space for accountability. With her background in activism, she understands the role the media and civil society plays in democratic governance. The second issue on her plate is reforming the public sector in Tanzania. Prior to President Magufuli coming into office, there was concern about the high level of mismanagement, tax evasion and corruption in Tanzania, which saw the ruling party’s popularity suddenly shrink. President Magufuli seemed to be the right person to handle those malfeasances when he came into office. He seemed to have correctly identified the problem but it unfortunately came at a high price of tyranny. He opted for populist reforms instead of institutional reforms and his word became law. The reality is that Tanzania is in a worse off position today on consolidating democracy compared to where it was six years ago. Demand for accountability and transparency under President Magufuli often led to the risk of persecution, imprisonment or death. The ruling party CCM entrenched the state apparatus further to completely hinder and annihilate the opposition. So, President Hassan has her work cut out for her on reforming the State of Tanzania with progressive institutions. Any government that is not ready to be subjected to public scrutiny and accountability is bound to fail on its duty. Lastly, President Hassan has to work on improving diplomatic relations between Kenya and Tanzania to that of neighbours with mutual interest and benefit, and not wrangling competitors. It is always assumed that hostilities between Kenya and Tanzania started under the Presidency of Magufuli but it started with President Kikwete. The height of the tensions was when the former addressed the Tanzanian parliament, accusing Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda for sidelining Tanzania in their infrastructure plans after they prioritised the northern transport corridor, terming them a "coalition of the willing" that goes against the spirit of the East African Community. In this respect, it will be the other EAC countries who will need to re-engage with the new administration in Tanzania, counting on the goodwill of President Hassan.