Reports that Muhoroni Sugar Company is in dire financial straits did not come as a surprise to close observers of the local sugar sector. FILE PHOTO | NMG Muhoroni Sugar Company has received Sh30 million allocation from the government to enable it carry out a mini-maintenance. The amount, which is 20 per cent of the total amount requested by the company placed under receivership in March 2001, is expected to boost its operations as it awaits the planned leasing to a private investor. Muhoroni receiver manager Francis Ooko said they are targeting to conduct the repairs of its boiler in order to maximise extraction of sucrose and boost its productivity. According to documents seen by Business Daily, Muhoroni had requested Sh150 million to undertake alternate mini-maintenance. The funds was to be used for procuring equipment and carrying out short-term maintenance to facilitate recovery efforts at the factory. But Agriculture and Food Authority (AFA) acting director General Kello Harsama appealed to the company management to utilise the Sh30 million to allow them operate ahead of the scheduled leasing. “Taking into consideration the projected increase in sugarcane availability and the need to increase industry processing capacity, we recommend maintenance of the factory as the leasing programmme is awaited,” said the sector regulator boss. For close to five years now, Muhoroni has been experiencing challenges associated with old and outdated machinery due to lack of funds to execute proper rehabilitation and replacement of worn out parts.   The last time Muhoroni Sugar factory undertook maintenance was in 2016- 2017, a move that has caused the miller to operate at about 30 per cent of its capacity. Despite having an installed capacity of crushing 3,000 tonnes of cane per day, the company has been doing a paltry 1,000 tonnes and making it difficult to cater for its overhead costs. Mr Ooko however said that they have opted to replace the boilers to have the factory boost its crushing capacity. “We are still pushing to see if the government can add us more funds to enable us undertake more repairs and increase our capacity,” he said. The move comes at a time Nyando sugar belt is experiencing sugarcane glut with hundreds of farmers stuck with their matures canes following the recent closure of Chemelil Sugar Company while Kibos Sugar Company experienced a mechanical breakdown following the crushing of its turbines. By end of last week, farmers reported facing a loss of up to Sh50 million after they were left with over 14,000 tonnes of their harvests that saw them making long queues in different weighbridges in the region.