Meera Karia, the business development manager at Viva Global in Nairobi. PHOTO | DIANA NGILA | NMG Online wine sales continue to grow, but can they replace local shops? Wine distributors are enjoying a good year even after restaurants and hotels reduced the quantities of alcohol they order, due to fewer operating hours. Buying wine online has not only become convenient but also cheaper when compared to getting a bottle at a restaurant. Meera Karia, the business development manager at Viva Global in Nairobi says that they had to shift to online sales from mid-2020 due to the uncertainties of various business closures. “Although wine suffered heavily from the economic and sudden on-trade downturn, the low-tempo and moderate nature of the sudden lockdowns, more time for meal preparations came up, digital meet-ups and a propensity to treat oneself more often at home with a glass of wine, has sparked a rediscovery of the wine category. We saw an opportunity in the online wine business,” she says. Since focusing on online wine sales, Ms Karia says she has seen a high demand for mid-priced wines. “We also had to learn how to do virtual wine tastings where we started with our hospitality industry customers, trained food and beverage managers on wines and tagged professional wine sommeliers from various wineries across the world. This was a new trend that came about, and we see it sticking around for a while,” she adds. Samuel Ndichu, a sommelier at The Wine Box, launched the online platform in April 2020, just when the pandemic was starting. “Our online sales have grown since we launched. We serve a very distinct consumer base that wants to enjoy their favourite wines in the comfort of their own homes,” says Mr Ndichu, a seasoned wine and spirits professional and a sommelier for 10 years. Since opening, they realised that consumers are keen on buying quality wine, priced fairly. He says that their ability to handle quick deliveries for clients who need wine at the last minute for impromptu lunches or dinners with friends and family has been advantageous for their business. For Viva Global, price offers on select wines on the e-shop is one of the strategies that provided great sales. “Through social media, we promote combo deals and price offers which helped increase traffic to our site and increase online sales,” Ms Karia says. For The Wine Box, they eventually had to open a physical shop dubbed The Wine Box Cellar Door. “We decided to open an in-person store recently because, from our experience, wine is a tactile product. People like to pick out bottles and read labels. We also decided to offer tasting samples of select wines, offering wine lovers an opportunity to explore new wines before making a purchase, which was not possible virtually,” says Mr Ndichu. Will buying wine online stick post-pandemic? According to Euromonitor International, the future of the store is in a digital world. “The retail store of 2040 will almost be unrecognisable from today. Innovative technologies will reinvent the shopping experience,” it noted in a report released yesterday. Ms Karia says online wine buying is one new habit that is likely to stay. “User-friendly apps would be the next big thing in the wine sector. Wine shoppers are already using the Internet to learn about wines,” she says. Some of the top wineries selling in Kenya have already developed clear strategies for online sales and marketing to ensure future success. “Cutting back on travel is an additional factor that will drive growth of virtual wine tastings. People might find it easier to gather at their homes and enjoy a virtual wine experience,” Ms Karia says.