Nairobi's iconic Kenyatta International Convention Centre (KICC). FILE PHOTO | NMG The Kenyatta International Convention Centre (KICC) has petitioned Parliament to help secure titles for four prime parcels of land on which the iconic tower block stands. Ms Nana Gecaga, the KICC chief executive, told the National Assembly’s Public Investments Committee (PIC) that efforts to secure the ownership documents had stalled. “Land issues have been a source of major concern for us. We have tried everything including going to court,” Ms Gecaga said. Appearing before PIC to respond to audit queries, Ms Gecaga said KICC only owns a title deed for land measuring 1.694 acres where the tower block stands. She added that KICC has no documents to prove ownership of the parking area commonly known as Comesa Grounds, land where Garden Square Restaurant stands and the statue of Kenya’s founding President Jomo Kenyatta. Ms Gecaga, however, told the committee chaired by Abdulswamad Nassir that despite KICC holding the title deed for land where the office block stands, former ruling party Kanu has filed a suit in court claiming ownership. Ms Gecaga said Mr Armstrong Kasuku, who trades as Garden Square Restaurant, has also filed a suit claiming ownership. MPs heard that the parking area land as well as where Garden Square and Kenyatta statue- stand in records appear as “unallocated government land.” “Ms Kasuku said in court pleadings that he was allocated the Garden Square land by former President and Kanu chairman Daniel arap Moi,” Ms Janefrancis Mutisya, the KICC corporation secretary/director legal services told PIC. Mr Nassir stood down Ms Gecaga from providing evidence on land ownership and directed KICC to conduct a search to ascertain true ownership of the three disputed parcels. Auditor-General Nancy Gathungu had flagged the issue of the title deed for arguing it is not registered in the name of KICC. But the identity of the person or entity in whose name the title deed of the land, which is valued at Sh2.29 billion, is registered has not been revealed in the public auditor’s report for 2018/19.