Technicians repair power lines. FILE PHOTO | NMG Nairobi’s share of the national electricity consumption has dropped below the 50 per cent-mark, signalling that the capital city's economic dominance over the other 46 devolved is waning. Data released by the power distribution firm show that Nairobi accounted for 47.8 per cent of its unit sales in the year to June, down from 52.16 per cent in 2018. The heavy concentration of power consumption in Nairobi indicates inequality in the country’s economic development, partly attributed to the previous centralised system of government which guided sharing of resources since independence. The devolved system of government raised hopes of addressing the economic imbalance, but analysts say there is need to offer incentives to attract private investors to counties. Nairobi accounted for more than half of Kenya Power’s electricity sales in the years leading to 2018, which reflected the capital city’s economic dominance over the other 46 devolved units created in 2013 to address the wealth imbalance. Power consumption is often an indicator of the number of electrical equipment plugged into the national grid — including industrial machinery — pointing to economic output. It may also be a result of increased use of home appliances such as TV sets and refrigerators that point to improvement in household incomes and rising standards of living. Devolution power Nairobi has the largest concentration of industries and wealthy homes in the country, with half of the large power users located in the city’s Industrial Area and central business district. Kenya Power has divided the country into eight regions; Nairobi South, Nairobi West, Central Rift, North Rift, North Western, Mount Kenya, West Kenya and Coast Regions. South Nyanza that has the counties of Kisii, Nyamira, Migori, and Homa Bay is the least consumer of power with 123 million kilowatt hour (kWh) followed by North Rift at 302 million kWh. Rift Valley accounted 13.5 per cent of Kenya Power’s electricity sales, Coast (10 per cent) and West Kenya at 4.6 per cent. Nairobi accounted Sh64. 08 billion or 48 per cent of Kenya Power’s revenue in the period to June last year. The utility firm made Sh133 billion in the period. The faster rise in power consumption by households and industries in the 46 counties compared to Nairobi backs earlier sentiments by the Energy ministry that had backed on devolution to drive power consumption. The capital accounts for the lion’s share of Kenya’s gross domestic product (GDP) at 21.7 per cent, according to Kenya National Bureau of Statistics data followed by Nakuru, Kiambu and Mombasa with shares of 6.1 per cent, 5.5 per cent, and 4.7 per cent, respectively.