Kitengela town in Kajiado County. FILE PHOTO | NMG The National Environment Management Authority (Nema) has closed down a factory situated at Noonkopir area Kitengela that was operating illegally within a residential area. The closure of the factory followed members of the public outcry over noise and air pollution. Angry residents had petitioned Nema raising alarm over sharp dust billowing from the unnamed factory causing them respiratory complications. Residents raised concerns that the massive pollution was worse at night. They reported to have been seeing vehicles entering the fenced off plot whose gates remained under key and lock all day and night. Nema officials and Isinya subcounty security agencies yesterday raided the factory where it was established it was crushing pozollana producing terrazzo. The multi agency team established the factory was operating illegal and had no legal approvals. Kajiado Nema County director Joseph Kopejo sent a stern warning to investors operating illegally saying the menace is a threat to the environment and a health hazard. "The crackdown on rogue businessmen will continue. Those who are engaging in unlawful unlicensed factories that are endangering health and polluting the environment will not be spared. It is not business as usual and we will not give room to selfish individuals to operate in cavalier manners including setting up factories at the center of residential homes, "warned Kopejo. Isinya subcounty police boss Anderson Njagi lauded members of the public for giving vital information that led to the successful raid of the illegal facility. He further reassured members of the public that information they give will be treated as confidential. "Information given to the police is vital in ensuring safety for all. It is encouraging that the public and police working relationship has improved in the recent past and we are hoping that it gets better by day. Nobody should fear reporting a matter of concern and interest for the public. Victimization of individuals is a thing of the past as the identity of those who report matters touching on security is highly guarded, "said Njagi. The facility will remain closed until Nema carries an assessment report. Recently Nema closed down a private slaughterhouse at Kitengela over non compliance.