Construction works at Kipevu Oil Terminus at the Mombasa port in readiness for shipping of Kenya’s crude oil from Turkana from July 31, 2019. PHOTO | NMG Turkana oil development may be fast running out of options and time. An eventuality Kenya needs to avoid lest the oil deposits become stranded assets condemned to remain eternally buried underground. Turkana oil with a potential production of 70,000-100,000 barrels per day (bpd) was discovered in 2012 creating a high level of excitement and economic hopes. The current shareholders of the Turkana oil project are Tullow (50 per cent), Total (25 per cent) and Africa Oil (25 per cent). However, no physical activity is currently taking place at the oilfields. A series of local, regional, and global occurrences have continued to weaken the economic viability of the Turkana oil project. In 2014, global oil prices collapsed from above $100 per barrel to as low as $30 due to global oil oversupply. Since then, prices have averaged well below $65, which are below break-even oil price assumptions for the Turkana oil project. Come 2015, the government of Uganda decided to abandon the proposed Uganda-Kenya crude oil export pipeline joint venture that was to run from Lake Albert, through Turkana to a new Lamu port, and instead pump their oil via Tanzania. Without Uganda oil, the planned Lamu pipeline would end up with higher unit capital and operating costs The Tanzania oil export routing by Uganda was heavily influenced by Total, who later in 2016 acquired a 25 per cent stake in the Turkana oil project from Maersk, becoming a common presence in Uganda and Kenya. The second global oil price collapse in 2019 weakened Tullow’s financial capacity, forcing the company to exit Uganda while looking for a buyer for Kenya assets. It can be correctly assumed that Tullow will likely exit Turkana by the end of 2021 when their agreement extension by the government expires. Unless of course, they find a credible buyer or investor before then. The Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 significantly weakened global oil demands, causing oil prices to collapse further. This is when major oil companies decided to globally reduce their capital spend in upstream oil exploration and production. This makes it difficult for Turkana oil to attract major oil companies. In 2020, the momentum for an energy transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy further forced oil companies to modify their long-term investment philosophy, which now entails scaling down investments in oil. Mounting pressure from Western governments, climate lobbies, and financiers — multilateral, bilateral and commercial — has effectively scared off investments in projects like Turkana oil. I will here try to go wild with options that I think are available for Turkana oil. First, a very high-level meeting should be held with the Total International CEO, for indeed it is Total that has the best ideas as to where Turkana oil will end. Total should give indications if they will keep their stake in Turkana oil and if so how they will commercialise it. I doubt Total will support the Lamu export route having rejected it in the past. Can we look west and seek to link a shorter pipeline from Turkana to join the Uganda-Tanzania pipeline? Total can indicate how practical this is, as they are the main shareholder of the Uganda-Tanzania pipeline. Can the government of Kenya afford to develop crude oil production and Lamu pipeline infrastructure as a major shareholder? If it will involve borrowed capital, I doubt this can happen due to avoidance of new oil projects by global financiers, and national indebtedness. Can Turkana oil be refined at a suitable location in Kenya? The construction of new refineries the size of 70,000 bpd is unlikely to be economical and will be difficult to attract investors. Can Turkana oil be pumped and refined at the proposed new refinery in Uganda with products pumped back to Kenya? If we run out of options, can we consider constructing a major thermal power plant in Turkana using medium speed diesel engines driven by crude oil to produce many megawatts of electricity — certainly more than 1,000 megawatts. The power may not be green enough, but at least it is indigenous energy with a possible lifespan of about 25 years. The above are certainly “out of the box” suggestions that should trigger discussions. We should avoid condemning Turkana oil to remain forever buried, the way we appear to have done with Kitui coal. Mr Wachira is the director, Petroleum Focus Consultants. wachira@petroleumfocus.com