You already know that change is necessary for your personal growth - but you often can't help but shy away from it in favour of the choices you're familiar with. You're known as a person who plays it safe – you watch your back, you don’t rock any boats, you sail smoothly and keep the status quo. In fact, you’re seen as reliable. Your friends and family also love this about you, They know you’ll be there whenever they need you. Some people find you stubborn for always sticking to your ways. What most, including you, don't realise is that you crave security and love the consistency of your daily routine - and you may feel discomfort whenever you're forced to shy away from this routine. You’re not crazy about spontaneity so of course you're not very fond of surprises and risk being considered boring in some quarters. All this may not be so bad. The main issue is that you're rarely the person who can be relied upon to come up with game-changing ideas. This is what happens when you fear change. To overcome your fear of change is to be more eager to dive into new experiences like travelling, meeting new people and sharing more of yourself. With openness, you inevitably attract more career and financial opportunities not because these suddenly come up, but rather because you develop a refreshed perspective. You acquire the ability to see things from a whole new point of view which leads to more creativity and initiative both at work and at home. This may sound ridiculous but many of us are afraid of our own success. We may very well be effective doers and go-getter. We have the guts, the smarts and the potential to make the impossible a reality but we also have this paralysing fear of being noticed. We equate being recognised and appreciated with arrogance, so we avoid the spotlight at any cost. During meetings, we are happy to remain silent rather than vocalise our amazing ideas. We would rather not put ourselves forward in case we are asked to lead some initiative or other because we've seen others hurt by it. While we are aware that it may just be the action that catapults our growth, we are rendered immobile by self-doubt and procrastination. We console ourselves by declaring that we are very shy. This sounds plausible to everyone and we are often excused but the truth is known to us and it eats into us every day, we miss the next opportunity to showcase our brilliance and allow ourselves to be relegate to the back end of the stage where we watch others act, speak and perform in ways that we know we can do better in but fear the bounty it might bring. When you think about your past experiences, there are situations in which friends or family members were jealous of you and your accomplishments and showed it by voicing a snide comment or two. Let us stop giving two hoots about them. Our self-confidence goes right through the ceiling when we start speaking out. We inevitably accomplish more at work and in social situations just by voicing our opinions and adding our thoughts to those of others. We’ve got to be aware that it is a duty that all of us have, to share our unique gifts with others, and have them enriched by our knowledge, allow them the honour of reciprocating by giving more of themselves to us in return because life and work are about sharing. A free flow of giving and taking with mutual benefit as the ultimate reward. It is in this way that we step into our planes of success to become magnets for people and opportunities that empower us to raise our lives and careers to the peak.