Education Cabinet Secretary Prof George Magoha. FILE PHOTO | NMG Education Cabinet secretary George Magoha has ruled out adjusting the school calendar, citing the flattening of the Covid-19 infections curve. He said the learners, who are currently on holiday, would resume schools on May 10 for their third term as earlier planned. The number of Covid-19 infections has declined over the past two weeks with the positivity rate dropping to 11.8 per cent on Sunday from a high of 26.6 per cent on March 29. “Since it looks like the Covid-19 curve is beginning to flatten, there may be no need to summon education stakeholders, for now, to look at the timetable afresh,” said Prof Magoha when he supervised the opening of the Kenya Certificate of Secondary Education exams container in Kiambu yesterday. The Education ministry in November released the school schedule for the next three years that shortened terms and holidays. Grade Four, Standard Eight and Form Four learners resumed school in October while the rest returned on January 4. As part of the preparations for the reopening, the government allocated Sh1.9 billion under the Economic Stimulus Programme for the supply of locally made desks to public primary and secondary schools. The plan was to ensure each learner got a spacious personal desk and cushion Jua Kali workshops and carpenters from the effects of Covid-19. Additionally, the schools were required to install handwashing points and ensure the wearing of face masks even as the ministry admitted to challenges in ensuring social distancing in schools. Education Cabinet secretary George Magoha has ruled out adjusting the school calendar, citing the flattening of the Covid-19 infections curve. He said the learners, who are currently on holiday, would resume schools on May 10 for their third term as earlier planned. The number of Covid-19 infections has declined over the past two weeks with the positivity rate dropping to 11.8 per cent on Sunday from a high of 26.6 per cent on March 29. “Since it looks like the Covid-19 curve is beginning to flatten, there may be no need to summon education stakeholders, for now, to look at the timetable afresh,” said Prof Magoha when he supervised the opening of the Kenya Certificate of Secondary Education exams container in Kiambu yesterday. The Education ministry in November released the school schedule for the next three years that shortened terms and holidays. Grade Four, Standard Eight and Form Four learners resumed school in October while the rest returned on January 4. As part of the preparations for the reopening, the government allocated Sh1.9 billion under the Economic Stimulus Programme for the supply of locally made desks to public primary and secondary schools. The plan was to ensure each learner got a spacious personal desk and cushion Jua Kali workshops and carpenters from the effects of Covid-19. Additionally, the schools were required to install handwashing points and ensure the wearing of face masks even as the ministry admitted to challenges in ensuring social distancing in schools.