Insurance Regulatory Authority CEO Godfrey Kiptum. FILE PHOTO | NMG Last year, while individuals and businesses struggled to honour their insurance premium obligations, some Sh38.1 billion of these payments failed to reach the insurers, exposing the insured to misery were the risks to occur. The unremitted premiums have been rising from Sh26 billion in 2014, Sh34.5 billion in 2016 and Sh37 billion in 2017. In the recent times, 2018 was the worst year with a figure of Sh43 billion before the regulator acted and brokers, agents and other intermediaries handling the collections cut this figure to Sh35.7 billion. While the Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA) has asked brokers to focus on earning commissions and spend less time on collecting the premiums, we put it to the IRA that it should take charge and stop sleeping on the job. Already there are rules with which errant brokers can be aligned, punished, suspended or thrown out of the struggling sector. Why should all brokers be blamed for the sins of a few rotten apples that the regulator can easily remove to rid the business of a bad name and put it on the road to firm recovery? The IRA was created in far-reaching reforms when the insurance industry was choking under a laissez faire environment that kept away many potential customers who detested the unbelievable drama when it was the time to be paid claims. This is how Kenya’s insurance penetration has remained low and the various attempts to convince individuals and businesses to take up policies are a hard sell. We ask the IRA to review this shameful situation by tabulating the risks to the economy when people are operating without insurance that is a modern continuity tool guided by the well-known policy of indemnity. It is unacceptable for the regulator to treat the premiums saga casually while the country could be reverting to the dark days of unexplained disappearance of collections, meaning claims could delay. While brokers and agents delaying in releasing the premiums are hurting their own sustainability, the IRA will be held responsible should such gaps and governance flaws return the sector to the wasted years of lawlessness, strained business and impunity.