Central Bank of Kenya. FILE PHOTO | NMG Fintech is one of the least regulated segments of the country’s financial services sector, but the industry’s unregulated days are numbered. Recent signals from various authorities indicate that change is coming – and it might be more constraining than some actors might like. There were several events in 2020 likely to have a significant impact on the growth and development of fintech in Kenya. These range from introduction of new taxes to drafting of legislative amendments to bring digital service providers into the regulatory net as well as the ongoing pandemic which is pushing businesses to provide innovative solutions and services to their customers. Nonetheless, the mainstream use of fintech will continue gaining traction in Kenya. The fintech space is vibrant, with significant development in digital lending, banking, insurtech and payment services solutions, which has seen Kenya rise up the global rankings. It was ranked 63 in top 100 of the 2020 Findexable Global Fintech Rankings. But, as in the case of most technologies, laws are always playing catch-up with advances. In Kenya, the law may be starting to catch up with the sector. Currently, fintech is under Kenya’s existing financial services regulatory framework, which was designed for more traditional products and services. As a result, there are instances where certain fintech firms are not regulated. This has tied the hands of regulators. For instance, when fighting dubious practices – as has happened in the digital lending domain – they have been limited to issuing warnings or cautionary notices to the public. But more concrete action is now in the offing. The proposed Central Bank of Kenya (Amendment) Bill, 2020 (National Assembly Bill No. 21) is aimed at introducing direct regulation of the digital financial sector in Kenya, bringing it under the jurisdiction of the Central Bank of Kenya (the CBK). This Bill underwent its first reading on July 28, 2020 and was referred to the relevant committee. However, it is not only digital financial services and credit providers who stand to be affected. Financial products and services are broadly defined under the Bill. When read in the context of the CBK’s enhanced jurisdiction, the implication is that expanded supervison will affect any financial service and product, including those of most fintechs’. This broad scope could be counterproductive. In addition, the Central Bank of Kenya (Amendment) Bill, 2020 (National Assembly Bill No. 47) seeks to introduce the licensing of mobile money lender platforms. This Bill underwent its first reading on February 25 and was referred to the relevant committee. The third Bill, the Central Bank of Kenya (Amendment) Bill, 2021 was gazetted April 16, 2021. It is important that current regulation evolves to meet changing consumer protection and public interest concerns, while maintaining an environment conducive to innovation. Unfortunately, the proposed laws introduce provisions that give the regulator wide discretionary power which, if not judiciously exercised, could stifle innovation. Similarly, there is need to ensure concerted efforts to harmonise the proposed Bills into one piece of legislation. Meanwhile, the fintech industry also stands to be affected by new Digital Service Tax and Value Added Tax on Digital Marketplace Supply. These taxes are aimed at entities that offer in-scope digital services to Kenyan consumers, such as artificial intelligence, cloud computing, digital streaming and digital marketplaces. The taxes are likely to act as a deterrent to fintech development and may. It is also clear that fintech service providers will be affected by the Data Protection Act as they rely on processing personal data to offer services. More clarity on their position can be expected through the work of the Taskforce for the Development of the Data Protection (General) Regulations, appointed on January 15. The draft regulations were recently published. Meanwhile, fintech players also have some positive developments to look forward to. Greater collaboration among multiple players can only do the industry good. In the mobile payment sector, the CBK has been working with fintech players and regulators such as the Communications Authority of Kenya. Another positive trend is the progress of the Capital Markets Authority’s (CMA) regulatory sandbox for emerging technologies. This has also paved the way for a potential multisector regulatory sandbox for cryptocurrency and evolving payment technologies to be operated as a collaboration between the CMA and the CBK. To date, seven fintech firms have been admitted to the sandbox to test various solutions. One participant, Pezesha Africa successfully exited the sandbox in October 2020, enabling it to operate a debt-based crowdfunding platform. The CMA is also joining 23 other regulators under the Global Financial Innovation Network in testing innovative financial products, services, business models and regulatory technology. All in all, fintech in Kenya is well placed for the future and hopefully legal and regulatory changes will be measured, clear and targeted to achieve the balance needed to ensure industry growth, innovation and consumer protection. Ms Issaias is counsel and Mr Indokhomi, partner at Bowmans, Kenya