Easter lockdown measures include a curfew from 6pm (previously 10pm) to 5am, a limitation on outside gatherings to 10 persons or less, a ban on non-household members gathering indoors, and take-out and delivery restaurant services. The sale of alcohol is banned. Whoa! Don’t panic. The first part is Easter for Filipinos. The no-booze rule applies in South Africa. Yes, Easter is a time to relax and refresh. Kenya’s most recent Covid-19 order has elicited much hue and cry, though we aren’t actually in a proper lockdown. For many who still refused to believe, this “third wave” is bringing home the truth and reality of the disease. For many more, however, the process of rebuilding businesses and livelihoods has, through this order, come to a screeching halt. A view is growing that these orders, like most public policy, are far from pro-poor; that there is zero empathy. Do not be surprised if what seems like increasing clamour for “reopening” (or not closing) turns into a virulent then violent moment. Wake-up call to our vaccinating and oxygen-hoarding political leaders – Kenya’s inequality is young and restless; hungry and angry! OK, this is Easter; a time for reflection, not condemnation. So, I have a wild theory that Kenyans don’t learn because we don’t reflect enough. In the technical jargon that pervades my work, our learning is weak because our monitoring and evaluation (M&E) is poor. Let’s reflect on this reflection. Like most countries, the pandemic struck like a bolt from the blue. With the benefit of hindsight, we needed something between a structured plan, and a flexible strategic response. We needed to apply the pathway of pandemic/disaster/emergency response from history. Conceptually, this is best reflected in the simplest basis of all strategy formulation: Today – Tomorrow - Future. By example, the World Bank has built current programming in Kenya around a Covid-reflective Relief-Restructuring-Resilient Recovery framework. Leading consulting and advisory firms are using similar outlines such as Now-Next-Beyond; Respond-Recover-Renew and Flatten-Fight-Future. Hell, what about React and Respond-Redirect to New Reality–Rebound to Future-Accelerate Opportunities? An important second hindsight in this thinking is that the pandemic response was never going to be linear. A second wave was predicted over a year ago. We are now well into the third. If this phasing process was one axis of the response, content was its other axis. By content, I refer to my refrain about the three dimensions of this pandemic. First, health (lives). Second, socio-economy (livelihoods). Third, social (living). Our strategy might then have been executed and tracked through this matrix of phased responses along each dimension, with real data. However, any reflection — a function of monitoring and evaluation —goes beyond the multi-phased strategy we didn’t execute, or the multi-dimensional data we haven’t used, while we all know that “culture eats strategy for breakfast”, as is the case with our poor M&E one. Let’s try a different angle. Much frustration is not simply about the recent order, but about if anything has actually been learnt from previous orders. A year and more into an unending curfew. An important expectation of the first round of restrictions was the building of capacities and capabilities for quarantine, testing, contact tracing and infection prevention and control. It was also about getting schools and other public facilities up to scratch in Covid-19 preparedness. So, notwithstanding third wave pressures, it is both disturbing and disappointing to observe continued Press and personal reports of massive shortfalls, weaknesses and challenges in these areas, despite levels of public spending and development partner support far in excess of revenue shortfalls and last year’s tax reliefs. This past week, the Central Bank captured the only logic of our latest restrictions. Rapid vaccine rollout requires vaccinations, not just the vaccine. Beyond social behaviour and hygiene, fewer infections and deaths need better testing, tracing and treatment. These could underpin Kenya’s economic recovery. The lesson here is that Covid-19 is no longer about “the government”, but better and stronger public-private-community partnership, treatment and vaccination continuum. Was there a perfect Covid-19 response we missed? Not quite, but we weren’t brave in our initial thinking, and aren’t sufficiently agile in applying a Ready-Fire-Aim (or learning by doing”) approach to an emergency whose end is unknown. This has been more “Spray and Pray”. Is the quality of “relentless follow up” that underpinned Vision 2030 now missing from our Kenyan DNA? Or is it in our culture to plan, budget and procure then not bother to monitor, track, evaluate, reflect and learn? Answers on the back of your Disease Infected Zone (DIZ) evaluation form, please. Food for thought. Happy Easter, everyone.