High Court Judge Said Juma Chitembwe, the first of 10 candidates to be interviewed for the position of Chief Justice and the President of Supreme Court on Monday, April 12, 2021. PHOTO | DENNIS ONSONGO | NMG The Judicial Service Commission (JSC) has already interviewed five of the 10 candidates shortlisted in the search for the third Chief Justice following the adoption of the 2010 Constitution. It is still too early to tell how the process will go but there are important lessons that on can glean so far. First, the democratisation of the office of the Chief Justice by the Constitution is good for the country. Unlike in the past when people would not know when one Chief Justice would leave office and the next one would join, there is a clear term limit and transition process. Citizens do not now have to wait for an announcement on the media, normally at One O’clock, by the President. The fact that anyone who meets the constitutional requirement is free to apply for the position and that the vacancy is publicly advertised, makes it open, transparent and a huge boost to the democratic consolidation in Kenya. Looking at the diversity of the candidates, it is fair to surmise that a majority of the applicants would not have been in contention for the office. Second, the public nature of the interviews gives all citizens a comprehensive opportunity to understand the applicants, their track record and future plans for the institution should they be appointed to the office. Having watched the candidates, it is possible to see those who will take the institution to the next level, those who will just occupy the office and even those who should not have found their way to the interview room. But it is for the JSC to make the determination. From the first set of the interviews, it is clear that the Judiciary is at an inflection point. While tremendous progress has been made there are still huge challenges ahead. The ones that stand out include funding of the administration of justice, inter-branch relationship and accountability. The country is going through a financial crisis, which is being left to institutions to find solution to. The Judiciary is no exception. It is important that the process of finding solutions to the funding of justice delivery be given a more serious thought than is currently the case. There are several issues to discuss in this process. Why is it that 10 years after the adoption of the 2010 Constitution some of the financial requirements like the Judiciary Fund are not in place? From a percentile point of view, it may be useful to debate about whether the quota of the budget that goes to the Judiciary is sufficient as compared to another organs of government. This is distinct from the total amount. Second is inter-branch relations. The interviews have had one running theme. There is something wrong with how the Judiciary, the Executive and the Legislature currently relate. Some tension between the branches is necessary. But when they operate as if they are different governments, the result is to stifle democracy. The standoff over the appointment of 41 judges must be seen in this light. To have the Court of Appeal operate at a crippling capacity largely due to the challenges around inter-branch relations cannot have been the expectation of those who envisaged checks and balances or independence of institutions. It is unhealthy for the country and the citizenry. Accountability is the other roving challenge. A few years ago, the Kenyan section of the International Commission of Jurists published a book on accountability. The message that I picked from the publication is the link between accountability and independence. As a country we have had problems with both in the past. In moving the 2010 Constitution, we have a responsibility to ensure that there is protection of the independence of the Judiciary. We need to also strengthen the accountability mechanisms, so that power is accompanied by responsibility. Unfortunately, the current conversations about these two issues do not recognise that they are two sides of the same coin. The third Chief Justice must depart from the normal discourse and realize that we are in a changed context and there is need for robust reengineering of judicial processes to address the realities that have emerged over the last 10 years.