Safaricom's headquarters in Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG One of the reasons corruption is so rampant in Kenya is so many people pay bribes to sidestep penalties for breaking the law. For, clearly, if no-one was bribing, there would be no corruption. But it’s a pattern that is destroying our whole legal system. Yet, as I stare at the latest impact from one company that has broken the law over and over, harassed, intimidated and bribed repeatedly, it has focused my mind on ways out of this endless loop of illegal behaviour and corruption. And the answer may not be in the courts, still so bribeable and still so wont to set aside the law and the facts for sufficient illegal payment, but with the private sector itself. For there exists in Kenya an ethical business code, and it may just give any of us caught the wrong side of corporate malfeasance a way forward in achieving some accountability and redress. The initiative began with the Kenyan Association of Manufacturers (KAM) and the Kenyan Private Sector Alliance (Kepsa), who worked with the Global Compact Network to draw up a clear and comprehensive Code of Ethics for Business in Kenya. The code is thorough. It conforms with the 10 principles of the UN Global Compact on human rights, labour standards, the environment and corruption. Companies must report on their progress in implementing the code, their breaches and what they are doing about them, and they are even supposed to demand the code be applied by their suppliers too — and some have. A notable champion has been Safaricom, which reports now on any ethics breaches in its annual sustainability report, but also, rather more behind the scenes, has refused to source from companies that do not commit to and apply the code too. Now, a lot of companies supply Safaricom, and I have personally witnessed, as a consultant within multiple technology and Internet companies, the impact of Safaricom’s demands for the code adoption, implementation and reporting. But I am also fully aware that Safaricom is still buying from some companies that are not signed up to the code and are breaching it in every possible way. To be clear, and specifically, I have seen in two different Safaricom suppliers, and both from the inside, one where any breach of ethics is acted on, most often with dismissal, as part of huge efforts to observe the code, and another that gets away with breach. The company’s list of wrongdoing, in fact, goes on and on, and it’s not the stuff of the UN Global Compact, by any stretch. But that Code of Ethics, now that gives us all some real leverage. For, it strikes me, if a company set on pursuing bullying tactics and breaking every law then bribing police and courts so as not to ever face any consequences, will Safaricom keep sourcing from it if we report it? And what of other companies? If our last remaining bastions of corporate malfeasance have not signed that corporate code of ethics and applied it, maybe we can move to get other customers to cease buying until the company applies that ethics commitment. Indeed, isn’t this what our consumer groups and civil society should be pushing and fighting for too? If we honestly do think corruption is ruining our nation — and how can we not — can’t we vote with our own buying power, and boycott those who come up as dirty on ethics and on redress for proven and witnessed wrongdoing? For, once we can get business and consumers to demand ethics of business, we start to close down the bribing side of the corruption — because it’s not the government and public agencies who pay the bribes. They receive them. In short, it’s time we used the codes to exclude businesses that still support corruption and suppress redress or correction. And start to build a cleaner Kenya. Ms Luesby is a journalist and entrepreneur.