University of Nairobi council chair Julia Ojiambo, Vice-Chancellor Stephen Kiama (centre) and council member Marie Rarieya (right) during a press conference announcing changes in governance structure, July 9, 2021. PHOTO | DIANA NGILA | NMG The University of Nairobi has more than doubled fees for its postgraduate courses and self-sponsored or parallel degree programmes, making it way more expensive than the other public institutions of higher learning in the region. It will now cost a student Sh602,000, up from a previous Sh280,000, to graduate with an MBA, for example. There is nothing necessarily wrong with increasing fees for Master’s degree or PhD programmes, especially if the university can match it with quality education. This was also inevitable after the Treasury cut funding to public universities and the number of students in parallel degree programmes — a money-spinner for many years — dwindled. The Treasury slashed the approved budget for public universities by Sh4 billion, piling pressure on the institutions already facing dire financial challenges. They were allocated Sh109 billion for the 2021/2022 fiscal year, down from Sh113 billion in the current financial year. With the new increments, the University of Nairobi hopes its revenues will bridge the Sh1.4 billion loss in the year to June 2018. But the review is coming at a time that companies have frozen promotions and hiring due to the economic ravages of the Covid-19 pandemic, dimming workers’ motivation to get additional academic papers. Unemployment rates are also high and the universities are not focusing on teaching future-proof job skills or new skills to spur lucrative enterprises. Globally, universities which charge high fees have for years worried that they might soon hit the wall — that is, price themselves out of the market. The University of Nairobi must be careful not to lose potential students to universities in South Africa or the UK that are slightly cheaper or whose fees are at the Sh1 million range but offer quality courses that increase prospects of one getting a high-paying job or promotion. To charge way above the rest of the universities in the region signals prestige and higher quality education. Therefore, the university bosses must prioritise revamping its courses and making its degrees competitive.