A room at Ole Sereni hotel, Nairobi. With so much unsold space, hotels had to become creative with their offers and packages. PHOTO | POOL  The pandemic finally made evident that Revenue Management is not about analytics and crunching numbers, but a lot about being creative to tackle the evolving needs of our customers’ base and convert demand. When times get rough, seizing every single revenue opportunity can be a lifesaver. If we change our perception of the hospitality business being less about just selling rooms and more like a retail business, we will look at our hotels and we will discover incremental revenue opportunities so far unknown. During Covid-19 pandemic, over three quarters of available rooms have gone unsold every week in Kenya only. With so much unsold space, hotels had to become creative with their offers and packages. Out-of-the-box thinking is the only way to survive this "Black Swan", but how can hotels get the best out of their spaces? What new ways of selling rooms and ancillary products should the industry implement? Hardship sparks creativity. We were forced to rethink revenue generation during Covid. Like so often, many successful concepts started with putting the guest at the centre and looking at what they really want right now, not what it is that we traditionally like to sell (a room night with breakfast). What our guests needed more than ever in the last year was a quiet space to work, an escape from everyday life and simply a real experience as soon as quarantine measures started to relax. To find new sources of revenue and new ways of selling, you need that magical combination of data and creativity. The data will help guide you to the opportunities, the creativity tells you how to take advantage of them. The challenge will be fostering and sustaining creativity. The extreme challenges and constraints caused by the pandemic required us to look at the business completely differently and simply not allow us to “fall back” on more well-known and well-tried revenue generating methods. Hoteliers should get as many new voices as possible to continue to bring fresh perspectives. Hasnain S. Noorani is the Group MD, PrideInn Hotels & Conferencing.