A past graduation ceremony at KCA University in Nairobi. PHOTO | FILE KCA University is seeking to raise Sh5 billion to build lecture halls and introduce engineering and technology courses amid increasing competition in public and private universities. KCA Vice Chancellor Prof Isaiah Wakindiki has said the funds will help the university diversify from accounting and education courses to in-demand courses like engineering, robotics and gaming. The funds will be raised from its founding sponsors, Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya (ICPAK), through commercial papers, loan or private equity and public and private partnerships for student housing. Most universities have been offering similar courses, raising competition in the higher education scene coupled with declined student enrolment as majority of high school leavers opt for technical courses. “Going forward, we will be looking to mobilise funds in a big way even through patents and innovation,” Prof Wakindiki said. “We are going to open more revenue streams through commercial papers, debts, and even public private partnerships. We are weighing all the options.” The private and non-profit institution has majorly relied on tuition revenues - which dropped in May last year on a five percent reduction in student enrolment, donations through the KCA foundation, and the Treasury’s budget. The funds will help the university scale up programmes, expand its main campus in Ruaraka, set up ICT equipment in a bid to increase it student capacity. It is also seeking to introduce coordinating campus in Coast and Upper Eastern to support virtual learning. “We are looking at growing in numbers and quality of our education. We are expanding our offerings as we remain a business and technology school,” Prof Wakindiki said. KCA has an estimate of 16,000 student capacity under four colleges and 40 programmes around accounting, finance, education information technology and research spread across the main campus, city centre, Kitengela and Kisumu campus. About 60 percent of the students are self –sponsored. The school will begin science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) courses for both graduates and undergraduate programmes, analytical thinking and courses on 5G technology relating to robotic and gaming, big data and artificial intelligence, internet of things, and medical equipment. “We started re-calculating and re-looking all our courses and giving them a new path, and then introduce some new courses. Already there is a committee and will be presented to the university council,” Prof Wakindiki said.