Data Protection Commissioner, Kenya Immaculate Kassait. FILE PHOTO | NMG Reports that companies are selling clients’ data without their consent is unacceptable and an invasion of privacy that should be nipped in the bud. More than a fifth of Kenyan companies shared customers’ financial and personal information in breach of data protection laws enacted two years ago. A survey by consultancy Ernst & Young shows that 41 percent of firms transferred their clients’ data to third-party service providers. This violates the law that restricts the handling and sharing of personal data firms and government entities obtain. Office of the Data Protection Commissioner (ODPC) should investigate the breaches highlighted in the report and fine companies that are not following the law. ODPC was established to monitor data processing and storage while ensuring that all this is done according to the Data Protection Act of 2019. The report by Ernst & Young paints a different picture. The report released last week does not come as a shock to most Kenyans, though. Just over a month ago people found themselves registered as members of political parties without their knowledge. The Data Commissioner is yet to explain to Kenyans how this happened. In the past, Kenyans have complained on social media about illegal sharing of personal information and blatant invasion of privacy by marketing firms and some companies promoting products and services. Unfortunately, these reports pass without any investigations. The culprits in the process have openly invaded Kenyans privacy with reckless abandon. Data protection rules came into force to restrict the State and companies handling personal data and prevent its use for research purposes. Therefore, Data Protection Commissioner Immaculate Kassait should work around the clock to investigate data infringements and take action against perpetrators. Digital devices have become part of our everyday lives. Meaning, a lot of personal information is stored and shared on devices and platforms such as social media. Having a strong data protection body and laws would ensure that content shared and stored does not end into the wrong hands.