The Central bank of Kenya, Nairobi. FILE PHOTO | NMG The Libor (the London Interbank Offered Rate), a key reference rate in global markets, is set to be retired end of 2021. The Libor is calculated for five currencies (USD, GBP, EUR, CHF and JPY) and for seven tenors in respect of each currency (overnight/spot next, one week, one month, two months, three months, six months and 12 months). There are between eight and 15 banks regularly reporting rates daily to the Intercontinental Exchange Benchmark Administration (IBA), which is responsible for posting the daily fixing. This results in the publication of 35 individual rates (one for each currency and tenor combination) every applicable London business day. Used globally, Libor is often referenced in derivative, bond and loan documentation, and in a range of consumer lending instruments such as adjustable-rate mortgages, asset backed securities, credit default swaps and student loans. For example, in loan contracts, a financier would price the facility based on the Libor three month rate plus a premium. Other factors such as the term loan, credit scores are also considered. The Libor is also used as a gauge of global market expectation regarding central bank interest rates, liquidity premiums in the money markets and, during periods of stress, as an indicator of the health of the banking system. In 2012, it was discovered that there was a widespread and long-lasting scheme among multiple banks implicated in the manipulation of the Libor rates. Further a change in the way banks transact amongst each other has led to a proposed transition from the use of Libor as a reliable benchmark to using alternative “risk free” benchmark rates. Across global markets, there are over $200 trillion in securities that have some link to a Libor rate, so even if Libor’s timeline stretches to the end of 2021, there is potential for significant market disruptions as the transition occurs. Many countries have responded by establishing working groups comprising market participants, regulators and central banks to reform Ibor designs and introduce risk-free realised rates as alternatives to Ibor benchmarks. Libor is hence widely expected to cease once official support for contributions to the benchmark stops at the end of 2021. Relevant working groups have announced and released a series of overnight risk-free rates (RFRs) such as SONIA in the UK, SOFR in the US and €STR in the euro area. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) recently unveiled the publication of three reference rates: the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), the Tri-Party General Collateral Rate (TGCR) and the Broad General Collateral Rate (BGCR). The production of the three reference rates signalled the start of the phased transition by the Fed away from the Libor to a new paradigm. As previously highlighted, this dramatic shift is part of a multi-year effort by regulators to restore market confidence and transparency in the wake of the Libor rigging scandal that rocked the global markets. TGCR, BGCR and SOFR reflect transactions in the Treasury repurchase market. TGCR is a measure of rates on overnight counterparty/tri-party general collateral repurchase agreement (repo) transactions secured by Treasury securities, while BGCR measures rates on overnight Treasury general collateral repo transactions. The BGCR includes all trades used in the TGCR, as well as general collateral financing (GCF) repo trades. Of the three reference rates, SOFR was deemed to be the best alternative to Libor. The switchover to SOFR is inevitable – but also complicated. One fundamental challenge on SOFR’s suitability for lending arrangements is that SOFR reflects an overnight risk-free rate based on secured transactions, with Treasuries as collateral. Libor, in contrast, provides a term rate with different tenors on an unsecured basis. In Kenya, there has been recognition of the need to develop a purely market-based interbank rate that will be the common pricing benchmark. The case being for a market based common interbank benchmark rate similar to the practice in developed markets such as the London market’s - Libor or emerging markets with fairly deeper financial markets such as South Africa’s Johannesburg Interbank Average Rate (JIBAR) and Singapore’s Singapore Interbank Offered Rate for the Singapore Dollar (SGD SIBOR). In July 2014, the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) introduced the Kenya Banks’ Reference Rate (KBRR) – computed as the weighted two-month moving average of 91-day Treasury bill rates and the Central Bank Rate (CBR). Later the CBK’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) suspended the KBRR on account of the Banking (Amendment) Act 2016 that introduced the capping of interest rates. When the Banking (Amendment Act) came to effect in mid- September 2016, the CBK determined that the CBR will be the rate upon which lending caps and the floor on interest-earning deposits are based. As noted, firms need to put in place programs and projects to manage the move away from the Libor, which is already embedded into multiple processes throughout financial institutions and companies, and organisations require a multitude of content and data points to support a transition to the alternative reference rates and benchmarks. A good starting point is to develop an understanding of an organisation’s exposure to Libor and other Ibors. Institutions involved in multi-currency and multi-jurisdictional transactions would most likely be exposed to the Libor. A review of existing contractual obligations, asset pricing, processes and functions is imperative. Further institutions will require to select new term reference rates, structure new RFR products, and update the necessary contracts and protocols. The writer is Chief Officer, Derivatives Market, NSE