Dr David Thuo obstetric and fertility specialist at LaFemme Healthcare Clinic in Nairobi’s Adams Arcade during an interview on April 27, 2021. PHOTO | EVANS HABIL In recent times, there has been a push by hospitals and clinics towards achieving operational effectiveness. This is largely centered around laborious thinking that seeks to ensure incurring lowest costs but achieving highest values for customers in terms of customer satisfaction. Often, we interchange operational effectiveness for strategy. Operational effectiveness majors around how well we align the activities of a hospital into achieving maximum efficiencies and best possible outcomes. For example, it would guide how we best schedule the available doctors so as to best attend to patients visiting the outpatient clinics whilst minimising client waiting times. It would inform how we best schedule the activities in the operating theatre so as to be able to attend to both elective and emergency surgical cases with most minimal time and manpower wastage. It would guide how we deploy nurses in the inpatient areas so as to best achieve the Nursing Council of Kenya’s guidelines on nurse-to-patient ratios. Unfortunately, operational effectiveness is limited by what’s called a productivity frontier, that is, the existing state of best practices. At a certain point in time, the maximum operational effectiveness in an industry will be limited by the state of the existing technologies, personnel skill sets and management techniques. The other caveat to operational effectiveness is that it can be easily emulated by rivals and ultimately does little to truly distinguish one organisation from another. This is where the need for strategic positioning sets in. Strategy can be described in many ways just as there can be a myriad of possible strategies. However, the confluence of the concept is that strategy is the creation of a valuable and unique position involving a different set of activities. Professor Michael Porter, a leading business thinker, describes strategic positioning as performing different activities from rivals’ or performing similar activities in different ways. Therefore, the ultimate reward for this is that a hospital will truly stand out in the eyes of its clientele if it can establish a difference in its activities that it can preserve. How can this be implemented? Well, a classic example is that, traditionally, almost all organisations perform a periodic SWOT analysis. This is outlining an organisation’s strengths (S), weaknesses (W), opportunities (O) and threats (T). And it stops at that. But this approach is inherently generic, copiable and laden with folly. A next critical step should be to further examine the interplay of these SWOT elements to establish the strategic activities that can result from it. For example, if the current Covid-19 pandemic has negatively impacted health seeking behaviour and increased the number of chronically - ill patients missing on their clinic appointments, why not introduce teleconsultations as part of the services portfolio of a hospital? And if the hospital lacks the necessary resources to deploy a telehealth platform, why not partner with an existing telehealth provider and agreeing on a costs and revenue sharing model? Such thinking can help a hospital navigate an existing challenge while maintaining its core mandate of providing clinical care services. Can strategies be emulated by competitors? Certainly, yes. These can be done in two ways, by repositioning and by straddling. Competitors can reposition themselves to mimic such a strategic position that results. Also, they can straddle, which is to seek to match the benefits of this strategic position while still maintaining their current existing positions. The straddler copy-pastes such new services onto those they already perform. However, the good news is that ‘water finds its level’. There are numerous case examples showing how a failure of an emulator to decide on what activities to perform and which to trade-off resulted in a tragic organisational downfall!