A woman walks out of the Mombasa Law Courts. FILE PHOTO | WACHIRA MWANGI | NMG The friction among the branches of government on separation of powers is not a new phenomenon world over. Countries, even the oldest and advanced democracies, have experienced this abrasion. Where ambition collides with ambition things do not run smoothly The doctrine of separation of powers is as old as the modern governance itself. This doctrine or concept can be traced to the 16th century with Aristotle, Polybius, Cicero, St. Thomas Aquinas, and Machiavelli who all argued that mixed regimes of the one, the few, and the many were the best forms of regimes in practice because they led to checks and balances. Matters get complicated in the operation of the system of check and balances, in that the Judiciary, which is one of the players and boasting countervailing powers, is not elected and it does not sit well when checking on powers of Executive and Legislature that are in most cases directly elected by the people and, therefore, bragging as representatives of the people. The doctrine of separation of powers is credited to Baron de Montesquieu. He initially suggested a pure separation of powers. First, formal distinction between legislature, executive and judiciary. Secondly, same people should not be allowed to serve more than one branch of the government at the same time. Thirdly, separation of functions between the three branches to avoid one interfering with or assuming the roles of the other and, forth, each organ be entrusted with special powers designed to serve as checks on the exercise of functions by the others to get equilibrium. In simple terms, separation of powers denotes that power should not be vested in the hands of few. This is the origin of the famous quote of Lord James Richard Atkin that ‘power tends to corrupt and absolute power tends to corrupt absolutely’. In modern Constitutions, the term separation of powers is not expressly mentioned, leave alone defined. The Kenyan Constitution mentions separation of powers three times all in the context of Devolution chapter. Our history is that of a distorted doctrine of separation of powers. The repealed Constitution provided a President who was a member of Parliament and head of the Executive. His ministers, their assistant, the attorney general were also members of Parliament and Executive. All the three past Presidents became culprits of Lord Atkins prediction. Absolute power corrupted them. The recent happenings and the pronouncements of the Judiciary in Kenya has brought into focus this frosty relationship between it and the Executive. Parliament has also had its brush with the Judiciary. Several Acts have been declared unconstitutional. Example is the Constituency Development Funds Act of 2015. When the High Court declared this Act unconstitutional, Parliament was furious. Scholars have argued that countries that adhere to the rule of law achieve better socio-economic development than those flouting it. Rule of law is a super ordinate term that carries with it several other legal principles, doctrines and maxims, including separation of powers. Separation of powers is one of the four fundamental constitutional concepts; others being sovereignty of the people, the executive prerogative and rule law After the great depression of 1930, President Franklin Roosevelt wanted a raft of legal measures to alleviate the effects of the depression. The legal measures were challenged prompting him to say that the US Constitution had not actually endowed the Supreme Court with the right to challenge the constitutionality of legislation. Roosevelt argued that ‘the court had ignored an important principle of presumption of constitutionality of Acts passed by Parliament. The doctrine of separation of power frowns at an institution usurpation of another arm of the government. Countries that observe the doctrine create powerful institutions that prevent one arm of the government from misuse of power through countervailing checks and balances. We are living in interesting times where the three arms of the government may not be reading from the same page in the implementations of the Constitution of Kenya 2010 and such frictions are expected to predominate.