A primary school pupil’s sitting in class, wearing face masks. PHOTO | COURTESY I am struggling to read the emotions of my students now that they have to stay behind face masks all the time due to the pandemic. Some of them are cheeky and I fear losing their attention during teaching sessions.  The question you have posed is much deeper than seems on the surface. Your concern is that you and your students are in some ways unable to communicate to one another using a fundamental tool of human interaction, which is the ability to read and understand the facial expressions of others during your duties as a teacher. Before we consider this most important handicap, let us look at the more basic question of the purpose for the existence of the skill of identifying faces and understanding them. Even more fundamental is the matter of what stage infants develop the skill of recognising the faces. When does a baby know which is the mother and who the stranger might be? Other interesting and equally arresting thoughts are about what the pandemic is doing to human development since children born during the virus will have extremely limited experience in facial recognition skills because they are at the most exposed only to parents and siblings and in many cases not even to grandparents! That this pandemic is standing in the way of many strategies developed over millions of years of human evolution is not in doubt. In zero gravity, muscle atrophy could die due to lack of use. Without facial recognition training, children might suffer social harm not yet contemplated. Your question, therefore, enables us to venture into some territory that very few dare imagine. So, what is the timeframe for human face recognition, in other words at what age can a baby tell her mother from non-mother face. This happens at the age of four months, and this is the time at which the baby will begin to ‘know’ that mother is not present and will begin to shy away from persons not familiar to her. Can a baby tell the difference between a smile and a face in anger or agony? Discussions among family members about how one baby was better than the other because they accept or do not accept the attention of friends and or family who want to hold the baby is fascinating because it misses the developmental nature of the process. To put it simply, the baby develops attachment to familiar faces at the age of four months. At the age of six years, children can process the faces of people in such a way that they can pick certain features such as height or skin colour that they use to determine who is who in their environment. Full facial recognition as happens in the adult does not take place until the age of about 12 years. What is the age of the children you teach? In addition to the physical features, tone of voice and general demeanor, humans use the facial expression to tell if their interlocutor is sad, happy angry, interested, bored and one uses all this information to decide how the human interaction is to proceed. What you are asking us, therefore, is the extent to which your skill as a teacher is limited because you are unable to read the mood of the class using that most important tool of facial expression. In recent times, we in the mental health field have had our own challenges because of the increasing use of telepsychiatry to deliver care. In this regard, questions have arisen as to whether telepsychiatry as a method of delivering care is as effective as face-to-face care. We also wear masks during patient interactions in our clinics which might also cause problems like yours. How much valuable clinical information we lose is a matter of speculation. All these issues and perhaps many others are related to the pandemic and are not at the table of discussion of the effects of the pandemic. We are all (rightly) preoccupied with the more immediate matters of saving lives and livelihoods. Another interesting if rather peripheral matter is that of the increase or otherwise of a condition known as ‘prosopagnosia’ or facial blindness. In this condition, the person is unable to recognise other peoples. Faces. Failure to recognise close relatives can often be most embarrassing. People with this condition can now blame the use of masks to in some ways hide this disability! For now, all I can tell you is to remain conscious of this and other challenges from the pandemic and try and develop coping skills by discussing options with your peers who are no doubt going through the same challenges.