Justice Joel Ngugi. FILE PHOTO | NMG The High Court has quashed the ongoing prosecution of a lawyer over allegations of assisting the house help of a dead British tycoon-settler, Richard Ingram Crawford, to forge a will to inherit his property. Justice Joel Ngugi prohibited the Director of Public Prosecution (DPP), Directorate of Criminal Investigations and the Chief Magistrate’s Court Nakuru from prosecuting, trying, hearing or taking any further proceedings whatsoever in relation to a criminal case pitting the State against lawyer Henry Aming’a Nyabere. The judge said the trial of Mr Nyabere was a misuse of the criminal justice system as the DPP was unable to demonstrate that the lawyer acted in any way beyond his limit as a lawyer to justify being tarred by criminal prosecution. The lawyer was charged with six counts of forgery, making documents without authority and conspiracy to defraud. The charges related to a property succession case in which he is representing his client, Sarah Joslyn, the tycoon's former house help and secretary. The tycoon's estate is reported be worth Sh74 million. He died a bachelor in February 2014. Stephen Ngatia Maina is contesting the will, claiming it is a forgery. The DPP also charged Ms Joslyn with various offences involving forgery of a will. In prohibiting prosecution of the lawyer, Justice Ngugi said the DPP was acting not in the public interest required under Article 157 of the Constitution but for unknown, ulterior motives. For instance, the court found there was no complainant in the alleged criminal offences levelled against lawyer Nyabere. The ostensible complainant, Stephen Ngatia Maina, had written a letter to the DPP indicating that he never lodged any complaint against the lawyer and expressly requested the DPP to terminate the criminal trial against him. However, the DPP remained adamant. Justice Ngugi ruled that the lawyer was being charged because of his duty to his client. "The circumstances here reek of a rogue Investigating Officer who is driven by crazed animus against Sarah Josyln which has now been transferred to her lawyer. Unfortunately, the Investigating Officer so fueled by his own animus has not found the needed moderating and modulating judgment of the DPP," stated Justice Ngugi. Secondly, the judge said the prosecution of the lawyer was misuse of the criminal justice system following a finding that there were no listed witnesses and no witness statements availed or available for the criminal case. "They are, so to speak, criminal charges filed in vacuum and in search of facts and potential complainants and witnesses. They are floating dangerously waiting to crystallize at some point in the future –all in intransigent defiance of the promises of Article 49 and 50 of the Constitution respecting the rights of an arrested and accused person and information which must be given to them at the commencement of their criminal prosecution," said the judge.