Graduates of the Generation Kenya skills programme during a past event in Nairobi. FILE PHOTO The world of work has been changing rapidly and many of the rules that were taken for granted in the past no longer apply. This means there is need for institutions to change the way they train and examine or assess scholars as they prepare them for new realities in the world of work. That also calls for transformation of these institutions to improve their efficiency, service delivery and the quality of the examinations that students, especially in tertiary institutions of learning sit on a continuous basis. One critical skill that the youth need to be equipped with is effective communication and financial literacy. In the gig economy, they will particularly need to manage financial transactions for themselves and their digital businesses, including filing online returns. This requires them to understand accountancy, entrepreneurship, financial investment analysis and corporate governance in addition to their ICT skills. For instance, Kasneb has just completed the major review of its syllabi to align them with the emerging needs of the employment market and to equip its graduates with the skills and knowledge they will need to remain professionally competitive during and even after the Covid-19 pandemic. There is need for training institutions, educational regulators and other stakeholders to be on the same page regarding what the market needs on the one hand, and how to prepare trainees adequately on the other. That is why it is critical to change the mindsets of the professionals who train and examine scholars so that their thinking is aligned with what their stakeholders, including the students, expect of them. The expected change is in the mode of delivery of content and subject matter. It is important too for trainers and examiners to appreciate that examinations are not primarily meant to distinguish between scholars who have studied well and those who have not. Rather, they are meant to bring out the best competencies, capabilities and skills in each graduate so that they can perform optimally once they complete their training and successfully take requisite examinations. This is a major shift in the way youths are trained and examined as it is not meant to create winners and losers or failures, but to show what areas individual trainees are competent in as they make their best contribution in their areas of specialisation. Such a shift can only achieve a long-lasting impact if the process of designing syllabi and examinations is participatory — bringing together the training and examining institutions and stakeholders in the job market so that they can understand each other’s needs, expectations and obligations. And with the disruptions caused by unforeseen developments like the Covid-19 pandemic, such collaborations should make the institutions more dynamic and responsive. One way of doing this is by embracing computer-based training, student registration and examination or assessment models that take into account such new realities as the need for social distancing while ensuring the integrity of the training materials and examinations. Such reforms will also require that the youth improve their computer literacy skills so that they can easily register for and access study materials and examinations whenever they are on offer. Such skills will come in handy even after they graduate since that is the new reality in many workplaces, including in self-employment and entrepreneurship. Besides digital skills, it is critical that scholars pursuing both academic and professional qualifications be equipped with skills like communication, creativity, critical thinking, citizenry or patriotism and training in ethics, interpersonal relationships and teamwork to equip them for the realities of the 21st century in and outside the world of work. As research has shown, such skills are crucial in moulding well-rounded citizens who see their contribution as part of a bigger undertaking to make our world better. With opportunities opening up in agribusiness and agro-processing, it is also critical to encourage young people to take up agriculture either as a core or additional business and to approach it with a commercialisation motive in mind. Farming has hitherto been considered as a subsistence undertaking and is hardly regarded as a business. As such, it has not been subjected to the rigours of accounting, book keeping and other business principles, yet doing this would help young people to appreciate agriculture as a profitable enterprise. For those who are unable to seek training opportunities due to financial constraints, systems should be put in place, in partnership with institutions like the Higher Education Loans Board (Helb) to offer loans and bursaries at university, college and technical training levels so that no youth is left behind on account of financial challenges. Such measures will be beneficial for both the individual and the government as we will build a skilled workforce for the future that will also contribute to nation building through their labour, taxes and investments. Dr Letting’ is the chief executive officer of Kasneb.