Auditor General Nancy Gathungu. PHOTO | LUCY WANJIRU | NMG The Ministry of Agriculture is on the spot over idle and vandalised bulk milk coolers that were procured for Sh2.34 billion. The State Department for Livestock procured 350 bulk milk coolers, each with a capacity of 3,000 litres. Auditor-General Nancy Gathungu has raised the red flag on the underutilisation of the mini milk plants. She said a field visit to 14 bulk milk coolers cooperatives in Kisumu, Nakuru, Narok, Kitui, Embu and Nyeri revealed that the coolers were either not functional or being underutilised. “In some cases, the coolers had been vandalised and had missing parts as there was no security, others had not been fully installed, while others were simply idle,” she said. The latest Auditor-General report shows that 190 coolers had been delivered at end of June 2019. Ms Gathungu has questioned the whereabouts of a balance of 160 bulk milk coolers valued at Sh1.07 billion. She said no status report was provided by the State Department for Livestock on the procurement, delivery, installation and utilisation of the coolers. “In absence of a status report from the Department of Livestock, it is not possible to confirm whether the remaining 160 bulk milk coolers with a value of Sh1,071,200,000 were ever delivered and installed,” she said. Out of the 190 coolers that had been delivered as at end of June 2019, only 120 had been installed. “As of June 30, 2020, no status report was provided to indicate where or whether the remaining 70 coolers had been installed,” Ms Gathungu said. The government in 2017 announced plans to purchase, which were to be distributed to groups of farmers with the capacity to produce at least 500 litres of milk per day. The coolers are meant to reduce milk losses and improving the quality of milk reaching the market. Under the plan, up to 20 coolers were to be imported from Poland every two weeks until the entire 350 units are delivered. Farmers in the targeted counties were required to set up a facility where the cooler would be installed, connect it with three-phase electricity and running water and ensure it was secure. Agriculture is a devolved function, whose management and funding falls under county governments.