The ongoing construction of the Nairobi Expressway along Mombasa road. FILE PHOTO | NMG Kenya has not unlocked the full potential of public private partnerships (PPPs). The current legal framework has fallen short of garnering sufficient private sector interest and investment. According to the World Bank Benchmarking Infrastructure Development, Kenya achieved financial close on only about eight PPP projects since January 2014 when the Public Private Partnerships Act of 2013 came into effect. This is despite having approximately 60 projects in the pipeline. Some of the projects that have fully materialised under the existing legislation include; the Road Annuity Lot 33 programme comprising 91km of road running from Kajiado to Imaroro and from Ngong to Kiserian and Isinya worth $96.89 million. Lot 33 has led to tangible and direct economic effects for the communities around the transport corridor by opening up at least 3 satellite towns. There is the Nairobi Expressway which is currently undergoing construction; and the Nairobi Nakuru Mau Summit Road which is expected to alleviate transport challenges along the North Rift corridor. Majority of the projects experience delays or stall between inception and project approval. Few achieve commercial close and less realise financial close. PPPs are investment vehicles that are available to government to provide public infrastructure or services while leveraging on resources and expertise from the private sector. A government entity enters a long- term contract with a private party to offer the infrastructure or service and the private party bears a significant portion of risk and management responsibility. Kenya is proposing a new law to change the tide on PPPs. It seeks to strengthen government’s institutional capacity on PPPs, streamline PPP procedures by introducing clearer project processes with definite timelines, seal existing legislative gaps and infuse best practice within the legislative framework. The Public Private Partnerships 2021 Bill proposes several institutional enhancements. Most significant being the elevation of the PPP Unit to a Directorate. The Directorate will have additional powers and functions in steering PPPs from conception to deal closure. It will serve as the resource centre for PPPs in the country while other state agencies benefit from its enhanced contribution. The proposed law does not diminish the role of other state agencies. It still recognises that these agencies are the primary public sector partner and therefore remain an integral part of PPPs. The proposed law abolishes PPP nodes, which are units formed on an ad-hoc basis within state agencies intending to undertake PPP projects. Functions of the nodes are distributed to other bodies within the PPP institutional framework and require more collaboration with the PPP Directorate. The Bill introduces PPPs by county governments and provides that county governments can now enter into PPP agreements in keeping up with the principles of devolution under the Constitution. PPPs by counties will require approval by their respective county assemblies and still require liaison with the PPP Directorate. County PPP projects will only require national government intervention if the county requires any form of government support measure or if the project exceeds the fiscal ability of the county. It is expected that these changes shall increase PPP activity in the country. From a governance perspective, the Bill proposes changes at leadership level within the PPP Committee. It requires in-person participation by members plus the appropriate skillset and experience from private sector nominees as opposed to generic qualifications. The appointment of a Director General with private sector background and orientation also signifies the shift in government approach and is expected to increase investor confidence and enhance collaboration among various PPP stakeholders. The Bill reorganises PPP processes to enhance efficiency. The approval processes have been collapsed from five key approval steps to three and in certain cases the approving entity has been changed for efficacy. The Bill now categorises the different types of procurement methods to include the default competitive bidding, direct procurement and privately initiated proposals. More importantly, it creates clarity on the circumstances in which each of these methods can be used and introduces timelines for certain processes under each method including the period in which bids must be evaluated. Privately initiated proposals as a key area of interest for investors has been significantly improved. The proposed law provides for faster processing of unsolicited proposals with steps and timelines, the introduction of the ‘Swiss Challenge’ and compensating principles, and clear parameters for consideration of privately initiated proposals by state agencies. The Bill also proposes a raft of standards and procedures aimed at creating clarity and certainty throughout the PPP project cycle. It is expected that the new framework shall offer the private sector the predictability desired to make and accelerate investments. Currently, majority of PPP related disputes arise during the procurement and contracting stages. The clarity offered by the Bill and its underlying implementation tools is likely to reduce occurrence of disputes. Besides filling in existing legislative gaps, the proposed law incorporates best practice associated with a robust PPP framework which will be beneficial for the country. For instance, inclusion of local content provisions requiring that goods and services from Kenya are prioritized where they meet project specifications and requiring compliance with local content laws and policies; inclusion of success fees at prescribed maximum rate of 1% the project value and which shall be applied towards the PPP Facilitation Fund; introduction of the ‘Swiss Challenge’ for privately initiated proposals and associated compensation principles; and generally adoption of principles of procurement best practice within the context of PPPs. Put together, these changes are expected to boost Kenya’s development and investment footprint and deliver public service more efficiently and effectively. The impact of this paradigm shift is already noticeable through the accelerated PPP reform agenda, the recent significant milestone achievements on PPP projects that are currently in the pipeline and appointment of new members of the PPP Petitions Committee. Kithinji is partner and head of corporate & commercial at Ashitiva Advocates LLP.