Cyber security attacks dropped by 49.7 percent in the three months to March amid warnings of looming advanced strikes. A national cyber agency said there were 28.2 million cyber threat incidents in the quarter ended March, a drop from 56.2 million in the quarter ended December. The National Kenya Computer Incident Response Team Coordination Center has, however, warned that cybercriminals have been developing powerful tools with the increase in uptake of technology. In a similar quarter in 2020, recorded attacks rose by almost 50 percent as organisations adopted remote working systems and e-commerce tools amid Covid-19 lockdown measures. “It was, however, noted that cyber threat actors are increasingly developing and adopting sophisticated tools and methods that are designed to avoid detection while maximizing harm. In recognition of this trend, the National KE-CIRT/CC is upgrading its detection systems,” the Communications Authority of Kenya (CA) stated. The National KE-CIRT/CC is the country’s cybersecurity point of contact and office mandated to co-ordinate response, manage the incidents, conduct research and distribute technical information on computer security. The drop in the attacks in the quarter was tied to drop in web application attacks and malware - relating to software designed to cause damage to a computer, server or computer network, including demands of ransom. Malware attacks dropped by 53.2 percent to 21.56 million, while web application attacks also dropped by 52 percent to 3.76 million. Attacks targeting company’s networks or software - through distributed denial of service threats (DDos) – increased by 27.9 percent to 2.89 million. The National KE-CIRT/CC received 298 digital investigation related requests as compared to 224 requests in the previous period, representing a 33 percent increase. “This increase is attributed to the notable rise in impersonation and online fraud as a result of the continued reliance on digital tools and online platforms amidst the Covid-19 pandemic,” the CA added. Cybercrime has seen organisations lose billions of shillings or private data. A report by Interpol showed Kenyans lost Sh21 billion to cyber and cyber-enabled crimes. According to Central Bank of Kenya, the use of cloud services by commercial banks, adoption of fintech has led to led to cyber-privacy issues such as data infiltration. Product innovation in 2020 led to increased risks of cyber security As a result cyber risk (data privacy and data security risk) turned out to be the key risk areas for banking institutions last year in their innovation endeavour with 35 percent, ahead of strategic risk and operational risks.