Wealthy Kenyans evading taxes has been an under-appreciated problem for many years. The rate of income misreporting is significantly higher in Kenyans who run multi-million shilling sole proprietorship or partnership businesses such as doctors, real estate investors, lawyers and consultants, than it is in low-income entrepreneurs. The Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) estimates that wealthy tax evaders owe it more than Sh260 billion. There is no question that more lower-income people are being examined than upper-income group. Month in month out, warnings are issued but fall on deaf ears as the rich stick to their known patterns of reporting income or paying taxes. The current punitive measures are not harsh enough. No one prominent businessman or company has faced a dire consequence. A few who have been in courts have been acquitted even after evading taxes amounting to billions of shillings, engaging in money laundering and forgery. The government’s new plan to impose travel bans, freeze assets and deactivate Personal Identification Numbers (PINs) for those found to have evaded tax should help to end this problem. However, Kenyans need to see action, not empty threats. The clampdown revealed in a commitment that Kenya made to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) shows that the tax cheats risk collection of duty directly from their suppliers and bankers, and prosecution in what promises to be the biggest crackdown. Uncollected taxes amounting to Sh260 billion can save Kenya the trouble of loans, most of which come with policy adjustments. If the tax bracket captured everyone and tax evasion was tamed, Kenya would not have had to get Sh255 billion from the IMF for the Covid pandemic response and to address debt vulnerabilities. The KRA would also not have to raise more taxes for the ever-expanding national Budget as well as debt obligations. Kenyans, especially the employed and low-income earners, are already feeling the weight of high taxes as tax cheats go Scot-free. Let detectives identify tax violations and people to skirting the law and prosecute them. The KRA must act now and seal the revenue leaks to meet its target of Sh1.77 trillion in the financial year starting July.