Isaac Mwaura. FILE PHOTO | NMG Nominated Senator Isaac Mwaura will lose hefty perks in addition to repaying any outstanding mortgage and car loans after Senate Kenneth Lusaka issued a Gazette notice declaring his seat vacant. Each MP earns a basic pay of Sh710,000 in addition to juicy sitting and travel perks, mileage allowance, Sh250,000 housing allowance, Sh5 million car grant, Sh7 million car loan and Sh20 million mortgage Each legislator is paid Sh5,000 for six plenary sittings bringing the weekly take home to Sh60,000. The amount has since last year been cut to below Sh45,000 weekly following reduction of sitting to five to stem the spread of Covid-19 after several MPs tested positive of the virus. Traditionally, the business of the House is transacted on Tuesday and Thursday afternoon and the whole day on Wednesday. MPs are entitled to a car loan and a mortgage facility that is repayable at the end of their five-year term or if one loses his seat. The PSC also provides MPs with a medical scheme of Sh10 million for inpatient cover per family, Sh300,000 for outpatient, Sh150,000 for maternity and Sh75,000 for dental care. The lawmakers also enjoy the services of security personnel, researchers, office assistants, drivers and Sh50,000 monthly for office rent, all courtesy of the Parliamentary Service Commission (PSC). “It is notified for the information of the general public that pursuant to Article 103 (1) (e) (i) of the Constitution and section 37 of the Elections Act, the seat of the Member of the Senate elected under Article 98 (1) (d) of the Constitution and held by Hon. Isaac Mwaura Maigua became vacant, with effect from the 7th May, 2021. Dated the 10th May, 2021,” the gazette notice stated.   Mr Mwaura could enjoy a Sh125,000 monthly pension having served for two terms, first as an ODM Party nominated MP between 2013 and 2017 and currently as nominated Senator under Jubilee Party. His trouble started last year when he switched allegiance from Jubilee Party to United Democratic Alliance (UDA) that is linked to Deputy President William Ruto. Mr Mwaura seat was declared vacant despite a number of Senators drawing the attention of Mr Lusaka to an existence of a court order barring his removal from Parliament. Attempts by senators Kipchumba Murkomen, Susan Kihika, Kithure Kindiki and Samson Cherargey to plead with Speaker Lusaka to reverse the gazette notice were unsuccessful after James Orengo and Moses Wetangula warned against the move. “This matter is very unfortunate. I have always pleaded that this House has to comply with court orders. The problem is there is a gazette notice. In law we say its functus officio. You cannot reverse this decision. Not even the President can revise the gazette under an instrument of law. Once he gazettes something, it is over,” Mr Orengo said. Mr Wetangula asked Mr Mwaura to move to court and stay the gazette notice pending hearing of his case on May 20. Lusaka said he had no knowledge of a court order prior to issuing the gazette.