Just like urban centres sprout wherever a railway line passes, so have transformative innovations mushroomed around M-Pesa. The mobile money system has been like a train engine, more and more wagons of innovation getting hitched on as it chugs along. And so have virtual centres of innovation continued to sprout. The evolution that is critical to its success is associated with the development of a retail electronic payments platform that was real-time and that has become a game-changer in digital financial services ecosystem. When M-Pesa was launched in 2007, financial inclusion, describing the percentage of the populations’ access to formal financial services, was far much lower. Just 26.7 percent of the population had access to formal financial services in 2006 and as of 2019, 82.9 percent of the population had access to formal financial services. Over the last 14 years that M-Pesa has been in existence, a series of innovations, whose emergence and success can be directly attributed to the mobile money transfer and payment system, have found utility across industries. It has contributed significantly to Kenya’s position as a continental leader in innovations, besides helping to address societal challenges, thus paving the way for sustainable, inclusive growth. Numerous innovations addressing challenges in different industries have embedded the payment solution. For instance, One Acre Fund has a loan programme for smallholder farmers to purchase inputs and make flexible repayments via M-Pesa. The M-Akiba programme allows citizens to invest in government securities using mobile phone transactions. Residents of Mathare slums can access clean water from vending machines and pay for it using smartcards recharged through M-Pesa. M-Kopa Solar enables low-income earners to acquire solar energy solutions, paying daily instalments on mobile money. On the M-Tiba mobile phone-based health wallet, users can save and pay for healthcare at accredited facilities. Many more innovations continue to be developed by the day. The mobile financial services revolution has innovated how the government provides services to its citizens too. Thanks to mobile money, the government's e-governance strategy had been roared to life, considerably boosting service delivery. Citizens, businesses and investors now enjoy various services that ride, to a large extent, on the digital payment capability and its identification system. On the e-citizen portal, citizens can access and make payments for a variety of government services. The payment system is convenient and time-saving, besides opening up new revenue sources for the government. Digital payments have also helped to seal leakages and fraud in revenue administration at the national and county level due to the traceability of payments and limited human-to-human interactions. Alongside easing payments to the government, mobile money has also facilitated targeted social protection programmes. It is possible to deliver cash transfers to vulnerable members of society and make payments for public work opportunities for young people. By enhancing the electronic payments system, it has spurred a vibrant financial system. Its efficiency, transparency, and safety have improved financial inclusion for many previously excluded Kenyans. In essence, mobile money helped formalise a largely informal market, accelerating access to the formal financial system in the country, which is substantially higher than most African countries. Research has demonstrated that financial inclusion contributes to poverty reduction. In mobile money, the financial services industry, and particularly commercial banks, have found a platform for mobilising micro-deposits and savings. In addition to this, it facilitates payment for utility bills, insurance premiums and loans. The system has also eased operations for banks since many of the transactions that previously drove footfall to banking halls can be conducted on the phone at a lower cost. It is mobile money that inspired banks to develop PesaLink on which customers can transfer up to Sh1 million between accounts in a single transaction, real-time and at a lower cost. Digitisation has made it easier to monitor financial activities and transactions. This has enhanced Kenya’s ranking on anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism. Mobile money has also stimulated the growth of online shopping platforms, allowing for convenient payment for purchased goods. Virtual mobile-based savings and credit accounts have driven access to financing, using transactions and savings data for credit scoring. This has removed the obstacle that limited access to credit and growth in credit markets for many who did not have collateral by changing the collateral technology. These virtual accounts have been replicated in Kenya and the rest of the East African region. As matters stand today, telcos and internet service providers are investing more, and 5G is now a reality in Kenya, which means that the M-Pesa network will only offer broader options. To sustain this evolution, connectivity will become critical and with capability for scalability as well as investment in electronic ID system to secure the market. The regulatory environment and regulatory capacity will need to be progressive to propel innovation and protect the market while nudging the market towards an optimal development path. Prof Ndung’u is Executive Director of the African Economic Research Consortium and former Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya