Education Cabinet Secretary George Magoha. NMG PHOTO The results of the 2020 Kenya Certificate of Secondary School Education (KCSE) and the Kenya Certificate of Primary Education (KCPE) examinations are out. It is pleasing that candidates performed well despite the tough times occasioned by the disruptive Covid-19. This would not have come to fruition without teamwork and guidance by the Education ministry, the Kenya National Examination Council, teachers and school administrators. This achievement is, however, behind us and focus must quickly shift to consolidating the gains made in trying to salvage the country’s academic calendar that stands distorted by the restrictions imposed since March 2020 to contain the spread of coronavirus. Only this week, thousands of learners have resumed learning as the country races to restore normalcy in the academic calendar through crash programmes. This marks the start of an accelerated phase of the academic calendar that is likely to be gruelling for education officials, students, parents and guardians alike going into next year. The consequence of this hastened calendar will be that we will have five examinations in 2022. A schedule by the Education ministry shows that the 2021 KCPE and KCSE will be held in March 2022 while candidates will sit the 2022 examinations in December of the same year. The Grade Six summative examination for the pioneer cohort of Competency Based Curriculum (CBC) will be administered next year. This clearly makes it an overflow of work that requires proper and planning or we risk bugling the whole thing. We should not forget the fact that the country’s general elections are also scheduled for 2022 and the Education ministry should race ahead of time and deal with potential challenges from the expected heightened political activity. And with the first cohort of the CBC set to be examined next year, the State may step-up the shift towards policy actions which supported entrepreneurship. With the CBC having been designed to focus on developing skills and knowledge applicable in real life situations, it is proper that those graduating under this system are provided with an ideal environment for starting own businesses. This should boost the jobs creation goal.