Police officers patrol at the Lamu Port following the arrival of the first batch of equipment on April 28, 2021. PHOTO | KEVIN ODIT | NMG I recall the day in August 2011, at KICC, when President Mwai Kibaki received the Lapsset (Lamu Port South Sudan Ethiopia Transport Corridor) feasibility report from the consultants in the presence of the Cabinet, principal secretaries, and heads of agencies relevant to the project. I was in the consultants’ team, specifically handling the refinery component of the study. After the presentations, the President replied in a simple but firm language - “It is a good report, and we accept it. All relevant ministries and agencies should implement their sections. And the Prime Minister’s office will co-ordinate overall implementation”. He had instructed the Treasury to ring-fence the proceeds from the sale of Grand Regency Hotel as seed money for the Lapsset project, which was immediately institutionalised with an Authority and a Board. In 2012, the project launch was done at Lamu attended by regional heads of State. For President Kibaki, Lapsset was a “must-do” project to open northern Kenya to socio-economic development, anchored in brief that transport infrastructure will stimulate trade, urbanisation, and open contacts with the rest of Kenya. This would simultaneously address insecurity challenges associated with northern Kenya. I am sure the retired President will be all smiles when the first phase of Lamu Port is officially commissioned next month. The Lapsset corridor project was to be implemented over time and had many components which include Lamu port, highways, railway, crude oil and products pipelines, a refinery, Lamu and Isiolo metropolis, both with airports. It is important to note that a contract for Lamu/Garissa highway construction was awarded last month, for indeed a port without hinterland connections to feed and evacuate the port would make it a lame project. It is important for Lamu port growth that the highway is further extended to Isiolo and subsequently to Lokichar town to link with Eldoret/Juba highway which was the original Lapsset highway plan. When this highway system is complete, Lamu port will become a strong transit option for South Sudan goods. Since 2011 a lot has changed in Kenya and in the region, significantly altering the original scope and shape of Lapsset corridor projects. The assumption that after independence South Sudan would transit its crude oil exports via Kenya failed to materialise as the country opted to maintain northwards transit links through Sudan. This significantly weakened justification for a crude oil export pipeline through Kenya and a refinery at Lamu. However, later discovery of oil in Turkana reinstated justification for the pipeline, but not the refinery. Further, assumptions on landlocked Ethiopia weakened when the country subsequently invested in an SGR linking the country to a substantially modernised Djibouti Port. Ethiopia also made peace with Eritrea, making it possible to use the nearby ports of Assab and Massawa. These developments have made Ethiopia less inclined on Lamu transit options. However, use of Lamu by southern parts of Ethiopia remains a strong opportunity. How to maximise utilisation of the three new berths at Lamu is the immediate challenge. The Lapsset report included a section on exports of livestock from Lamu port, and grounds were earmarked for holding and quarantining animals ahead of shipment. This project can be operationalised to benefit northern Kenya herders, including southern Ethiopia. This can be a quick win project with significant socio-economic value addition for the pastoralist communities. Since 2012, Lamu county has experienced increased economic activities with many new jobs and skills transfer to the local communities, which is what the Lapsset project was meant to achieve. The planned Isiolo metropolis has also been in full readiness waiting for Lapsset infrastructure to crisscross the town. A new airport is, however, already in place. Yes, there has been a lot of expectations and waiting all along the corridor. Let me try to summarise key success drivers for the new Lamu port. The livestock export project can be a clear early winner and should be coordinated jointly with the pastoralist counties of Lamu, Tana River and Garissa. Secondly, a through highway to Lokichar will clinch largest value for the Port. Thirdly, curbing insecurity in northern Kenya should be a top priority for accelerated growth of the Lapsset corridor.