Treasury Cabinet Secretary Ukur Yatani. FILE PHOTO | NMG Political interference has been blamed for delayed appointment of a new Kenya Ports Authority (KPA) managing director after hiring deadline expired about a month ago. It is claimed that a push by senior government officials to have their own appointed to head the authority has forced Treasury Cabinet Secretary Ukur Yatani to contradict his earlier statement directing that the hiring process be concluded within 45 days. On March 2, Mr Yatani rejected three names the board had forwarded to him, saying the candidates did not attain the mandatory 70 marks and above in the interviews conducted for the position. Over the weekend, Mr Yatani appeared to beat a retreat on the deadline saying he did not set “fixed timeliness” for the hiring process. “The matter is being addressed. We had no fixed timelines. We are reviewing the names, hopefully we are going to make it clear in due time once all processes are finalised,” CS Yatani told Shipping and Logistics in Lamu. According to sources privy to the hiring process, already three names have been submitted to the CS but political interference has hampered the process. “The names were submitted by April 13, the last day which was set by the CS when he revoked the whole process forcing the board to do it for the third time. We understand there is push and pull from senior government officials who want their own to head KPA,” said the source. On April, 13 when the 45 days expired, KPA board chairman Joseph Kibwana told the media the board was still finalising the process, claiming that the days set for hiring did not include weekends and holidays. “The deadline is not today but next week because the public holidays and weekends are not counted as they are not working days,” said Mr Kibwana. The board was expected to forward three names to the CS to appoint the MD to replace Daniel Manduku who held the position for less than two years before he resigned after battling graft allegations for months. Rashid Salim was appointed to the job on interim basis. The appointment process has since been suspended three times since March last year.