Beef steak served with vegetables at a grilling and distilling dinner event hosted by Ardbeg at Baobox restaurant, Nairobi on May 8, 2021. PHOTO | DENNIS ONSONGO | NMG A food and alcohol pairing could yield a stunner. Or it could go fatally askew. And when that whisky is a strong single malt, diners usually do not have the pleasure of a middle ground. For those with tried palates though, few combinations quite compare with whisky and beef steak. If the explosion of wine flavours with food is riveting, beef steak with a careful selection of whisky is divinity. Recently, I got an invitation to a dinner event, where Ardbeg Scotch whisky was on the menu. Having attended multiple such events before, sometimes it is hard to tell the sessions apart. I obliged in the hope of a little cheer to distract me from the dour May weather. Ardbeg is quite a heavy drink. It comes with a 92 proof (46 percent alcohol by volume (ABV), which is several punches above what local drinkers typically get at 40 percent ABV. For a palate that is accustomed to mostly wine, the first attempt to sip from my dram ruptured my buds. The notes from sniffing the drink alone give you certain light-headedness. There are several reasons for Ardbeg’s high alcohol volume. But the obvious one is warmth. Scotland, where this single malt is manufactured, experiences wintry weather most of the year. As such, the Scots like their alcohol content higher to keep warm. Distilled since 1815, Ardbeg was launched in Kenya four years ago. New drinkers Ardbeg East Africa ambassador Antoine Bbagaya says sales have been steady and drinkers “are amazed by the complex balance of the whisky.” “It takes between three and five years for drinkers to accept peaty whisky,” he says, noting that the drink is heavily peated, a character that local palates are getting to learn. {Peated whisky is given a smoky flavour by compounds from peat fires used to dry malted barley.} What made this tasting at Baobox in Nairobi’s Westlands unique was that, unlike other food and alcohol pairing events where a four or five-course meal is served with different brands of the drink of the night, in this case, there was one course only, served with a variety of drinks. Beef steak was served alongside an assortment of vegetables, with Ardbeg and the range of its cocktails on offer. Alcohol and food pairing is quite the rage in Kenya today. Two-century-old Ardbeg, which also manufactures Glenmorangie, has been running a series of exclusive dining experiences with the tagline “grilling and distilling.” Ardbeg is seeking to tap into Kenya’s fast growing alcohol market and court new drinkers, thanks to Kenyans’ exploratory nature. Just salt But it is in the preparation of the beef to go with the whisky where the real thrill is. Watching the wild, cheery British DJ BBQ (Christian Stevenson) dance with the grill, dousing cuts with rubs, is something of an elixir. Anything that comes out of his grill is succulent. Whether it is sword-grilled chicken wings on a small fire, a medium-size grill in your backyard or mammoth setups for events, DJ BBQ insists that mastery in barbecuing is about simplicity rather than complexity. To him, as little as salt is enough to season meat before setting it in the grill. If you insist on spices, dried and hand-crushed herbs are as sufficient as commercial rubs. For a memorable whisky and food pairing, Mr Bbagaya says four components are non-negotiable: great ambience, well-versed host and delightful dishes. “A host must have an understanding of the various food pairings. These meals must complement the spirit you are enjoying,” he said. No garlic You must also have the willingness to discover new flavours because, well, drinking single malts is a journey of exploration. On don’ts in whisky and food pairing, Mr Bbagaya says: “Don’t eat spicy food before whisky, especially Ardbeg. Doing so takes away the fullness of the dram. Garlic, especially, overpowers your whisky flavours, so avoid foods with garlic.” Are there pairing options for vegans and those who prefer white meat? The list is inexhaustible. He says one can have their whisky with a complimentary fruit for a stirring experience. DJ BBQ suggests that whisky and fish or pork constitute a neat pairing. To DJ BBQ, anything goes. It’s your taste to decide. Verdict? It takes some learning to get your palate to discern whisky, courage to enjoy the experience with food. Once your senses get used to the pairing, you are in for a thrill.