The Green Park terminus. PHOTO | JEFF ANGOTE | NMG The Nairobi Metropolitan Services (NMS) will charge service fees at the newly-built Green Park terminus to be used to run operations. The token fee will be levied on traders selling their wares at the matatu terminal, use of ablution blocks as well as advertisement spaces, among others. NMS Transport and Public Works Director Engineer Michael Ochieng' said the monies will be used to maintain the Sh200 million bus station that will serve as a drop-off and pick-up point for matatus plying the Ngong and Lang’ata routes as part of the wider Nairobi decongestion strategy. He said the fee, which is yet to be agreed on by the stakeholders, will enable the sustainable use of the terminal rather than running it as a commercial enterprise. The levies will pay for cleaning, fumigation and security services. A management team will be appointed to run operations at the park. Mr Ochieng' said charging a fee will ensure that the park is maintained at high standards and sustainably. “The park will operate a certain fee, a token fee, which enables its sustainability. It will translate to what activities will be within the park, what traders will sell, use of the ablution blocks, among others,” he said. “If I put an ablution block to be completely free you are killing it. How will it be sustained? We have the toilets in the CBD where people pay and the money is used to keep the place clean and pay those who keep it clean,” he added. He, however, said some exemptions would be made especially for the physically challenged or the elderly. The director said the fee to be charged is still under deliberation. “It is under consideration and we are yet to finalise on it. Once finalised, we shall make it public where the [NMS] Director-General Major General Mohamed Badi will announce the same at some certain stage,” he said. Mr Ochieng' pointed out that the terminus has a lot of advertisement spaces which can be used to generate income for the park to avoid having to allocate funds every now and then for its maintenance. He added that the Green Park village will also play host to a number of businesses, financial systems and eateries that can also be charged a token fee. “These are some of the things we are putting into consideration to see how the park can generate its own sustaining fee and when the decision has been made the public shall be informed,” he said. The terminal, located at the former Lunar Park, will also host other amenities including a dispensary, supermarket, restaurant and a sitting bay where commuters can rest as they wait for matatus. Two ablution blocks have already have been set up, one at the drop-off point and another at the pick-up area. A business centre with a restaurant and space for traders to sell their wares will be set up near the entrance. A police station has already been built to provide security to ensure safety of both commuters, matatu personnel and staff.