Leaders find themselves face-to-face with tough calls and have to take decisions that go against the grain when handling teams and partners. There is little room for tension on working relationships if such unavoidable decisions are taken in a favourable, atmosphere. Leaders, whether conscious or not, “create” the atmosphere in their respective workplaces. The effective leader is called upon to be an objective judge while playing jury at the same time. The resultant contradictory situation requires highly developed judgement to ensure that rather slippery favourable atmosphere is maintained. It is imperative that such a leader be a well-aligned individual with high-level self-awareness. Leaders worth their salt learn how the delicate balance of the judge and jury roles that they must play as they find themselves having to work with opposing ideas and interests. It is common for a leader to be partisan in instances when impartiality would be of particular benefit. To most followers, leaders don’t seem to be heartless in their decision-making processes. In fact, most think of the most flippant and even distasteful reasons as to why certain decisions are made – especially when those decisions are not in their favour. This is because solid leaders are lead from within. They possess an overall understanding of the unseen aspect of running organisations because the considerations that they make at the helm are not available to everyone. While this can be very frustrating for those that are not in the know of things, effective leaders rarely waiver even when their decisions are unpopular. They remain calm because they know they lead from their innermost intelligence and with that, they are almost always sure about being on the right track. You see, effective leaders have consciously mastered the laws that universally apply to all of us. Energy or spirit, depending on your persuasion moves in and out of physical form. Such leaders are aware that their thoughts are creative energy. They are confident that the more focus they give to their leadership, the more they harness their creative power to move that energy to produce the desired results for any organization and its stakeholders. Different situations bring out either our best or worst. To effectively lead others requires high alignment on a personal level. Those who are aligned shine their best out of most situations - even difficult or seemingly impossible ones because they tend to be in control of their creative power. As such,result, whatever energy that comes into their consciousness is immediately internalised and processed in positive and productive ways. These are individuals who have honed the skill of grooming their emotions to harbour only best of feelings such that any idea that they internalise is automatically enveloped in goodness. When we understand that our emotions directly influence our actions, we consciously cultivate positive internal environments within our minds to yield only positive actions on our part, and with positive action there can be no other result than positive ones. True leaders quickly learn that success is not about the situations they face but rather how they face them and what they bring to the fore from those situations to create the legacies that only they can. Sera@coachsera.com